
	   BONN, Germany (AP) _ German police raided several locations near
Bonn after receiving word of a terrorist threat against the U.S.
Embassy, but no evidence of a planned attack was found, officials
said Wednesday.
	   Police, including agents of an elite anti-terrorist unit,
checked several suspects during raids in an industrial zone and
other sites Tuesday, but no arrests were made, said Eva Schuebel,
spokeswoman for the Federal Prosecutor's Office in Karlsruhe.
	   The agency said it had received ``credible information'' that
Middle East terrorists had stockpiled arms and explosives at the
sites, but none were found.
	   The agency's investigation is continuing, Schuebel said.
	   ``For now, we can no longer speak of an immediate threat to the
U.S. Embassy,'' she said.
	   The embassy had no comment.
	   Security was tightened at U.S. installations worldwide after the
Aug. 7 bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. Saudi
dissident Osama Bin Laden is wanted by U.S. officials for those
attacks.
	   A suspected top aide of bin Laden, Mamdouh Mahmud Salim, is
jailed in Germany pending a U.S. extradition request, raising
concern about reprisals on German soil.
	   U.S. authorities charge Salim helped finance, train and arm
members of a terrorist organization, including the alleged bombers
of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
	   In September, German police stepped up security at the U.S.
consulate in Hamburg after receiving a tip about a possible threat.
 &UR; (tc-pfg-dkt)

	   ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (AP) _ An Islamic militant group on Thursday
threatened to retaliate if Saudi dissident Osama bin Laden is
arrested, and described Washington's No. 1 enemy as a ``hero'' to
Muslims worldwide.
	   Bin Laden, believed to be in Afghanistan, and a top aide were
indicted Wednesday by a U.S. District Court in the U.S. embassy
bombings in Africa and are accused of conspiring to kill Americans
outside the United States. The State Department also announced a
reward of up to dlrs 5 million for bin Laden's capture.
	   ``It is a challenge to the entire Muslim world ... Bin Laden is
a hero of the Muslim world,'' said Omar Warsi, a leader of
Pakistan's militant Sunni Muslim group, Sipah-e-Sahaba, or
Guardians of the Friends of the Prophet. ``If anything happens to
him, America will be responsible.''
	   Many Sipah-e-Sahaba followers are fighting in neighboring
Afghanistan alongside the Taliban army, which rules 90 percent of
Afghanistan and has imposed a strict version of Islamic law in
those areas.
	   Warsi's group is well-armed with everything from machine guns to
rocket launchers. In Pakistan, it has been blamed in killings of
hundreds of Shiite Muslims, whom the group reviles as non-Muslims
based on a centuries-old dispute over who was the proper successor
to the Prophet Mohammed.
	   Harakat-ul-Ansar, a Pakistan-based organization labeled a
terrorist group by the United States, said, however, that
foreigners in Pakistan ``have nothing to fear from us.''
	   Harakat is considered a strong supporter of bin Laden, and
several Harakat followers were killed in the U.S. missile attack on
alleged bin Laden terror sites in Afghanistan.
	   ``What the United States does is their business,'' said Abdul
Bassit, a Harakat follower. He added, however, that the United
States should know bin Laden ``is a good Muslim, and all the Muslim
world thinks he is a good Muslim.''
	   The Taliban say bin Laden is a respected guest who will not be
extradited. However, they have set up a judicial inquiry to accept
evidence of bin Laden's involvement in terrorist activity and have
promised to prosecute him if the evidence warrants it.
	   Washington blames bin Laden's group, al Qaeda, for the Aug. 7
bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania that killed 224
people, including 12 Americans, and injured an estimated 5,000
people.
	   The United States retaliated Aug. 20, firing Tomahawk cruise
missiles at suspected bin Laden training camps in eastern
Afghanistan. At least 26 people were killed, but damage to the area
was not considered extensive.
	   The U.S. Embassy in Pakistan evacuated nonessential staff and
family members prior to the August bombing of Afghanistan, fearing
retaliation. While some embassy workers are back, their dependents
and about 30 percent of the staff have not been allowed to return.
	   Embassy officials said no fresh security warnings followed
Wednesday's indictment. Security measures already in place include
cement barricades blocking the road leading to the U.S. Embassy in
Islamabad and razor-sharp barbed wire topping the brick-walled
compound.
	   In the northwestern Pakistani city of Peshawar, on the border
with Afghanistan, the U.S. consulate is surrounded by barbed wire
and protected by an armored personnel carrier and dozens of armed
police.


   NEW YORK _ Federal prosecutors in Manhattan said Wednesday that
one of the men accused of conspiring to bomb the U.S. Embassies in
Kenya and Tanzania in August had met earlier with Osama bin Laden,
the suspected mastermind of the attacks, and ``asked him for a
mission.''


   The reported meeting between bin Laden and the accused man,
Mohamed Rashed Daoud Al'Owhali, which had not previously been
described, is the strongest allegation offered so far to link bin
Laden to the attacks, in which more than 250 people died.


   The meeting, which prosecutors said took place in 1996, is
reported in a new 48-page indictment of Al-'Owhali and three others
that a federal grand jury in Manhattan returned Wednesday. It shows
how prosecutors are continuing to build the circumstantial case
that bin Laden, a Saudi businessman in exile, was behind the
embassy bombings and other attacks against Americans stationed
abroad in the 1990s.


   The prosecutors did not indicate bin Laden's response to the
offer; he is not charged in the new indictment.


   The indictment does not indicate whether prosecutors have any
evidence that bin Laden directly ordered the bombings, or whether
they may argue that he inspired a group of followers to carry out
the attacks. Bin Ladin has called for attacks on U.S. and other
Western interests.


   Nonetheless, in issuing the new charges against men suspected of
being bin Laden's associates, the government also declared more
concretely than previously that bin Laden has been a major backer
of terrorism groups worldwide. Its list of terrorist groups
includes Al Jihad in Egypt and the Islamic Group, which is led by
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, who was convicted in 1996 in the plot to
blow up landmarks in New York City.


   The indictment asserted that bin Laden's organization, Al Qaeda,
worked on its own and through Al Jihad, Islamic Group and others,
which ``operated under its umbrella.''


   The authorities also gave their first account of what they
called bin Laden's network of businesses and front companies in
Sudan that he allegedly used to raise money to support terrorism
and to provide cover for the acquisition of explosives, weapons and
chemicals, and the travel of his associates.



   CAIRO _ The Taliban movement in Afghanistan might consider
putting Osama bin Laden on trial for a 1996 bomb attack that killed
19 American airmen in Saudi Arabia, a leading Saudi-owned newspaper
reported Wednesday.


   Bin Laden, the Saudi-born Islamic militant who lives in
Afghanistan, has long been suspected of involvement in that and
other attacks on Americans, including the Aug. 7 bombings of two
U.S. Embassies in Africa. He has been indicted in the United
States, charged with terrorist acts committed before the embassy
bombings.


   But efforts to bring bin Laden to justice have been hamstrung by
the fact that the Taliban, which control most of Afghanistan, is a
militant Islamic movement whose leaders who have said they will not
hand him over to the United States or to anyone else.


   The report, in the London-based newspaper Al Hayat, that the
Taliban might consider trying bin Laden themselves could not be
independently confirmed. A senior Taliban diplomat reached by
telephone in Pakistan dismissed it as ``baseless.''


   But Al Hayat is generally a reliable source on matters involving
the Saudi government, and it reported that the Taliban had
communicated the offer to Saudi Arabia as a good-will gesture.


   If it is true, the report would suggest that the Taliban might
at least be reconsidering their position on bin Laden, which has
deeply complicated its relations with the West and with Saudi
Arabia, one of only three countries in the world to recognize the
militant movement as Afghanistan's legitimate government.


   Saudi Arabia has never charged bin Laden or anyone else in the
1996 bombing, and any specific American accusations linking bin
Laden to that attack have been spelled out only in a sealed
indictment. But U.S. officials have said they have learned enough
about the bombing, of an American military compound in the eastern
Saudi city of Dhahran, to regard bin Laden as a prime suspect.


   Saudi Arabia, which stripped bin Laden of his citizenship in
1994 because of his militant activities, has turned up pressure
against Afghanistan in a clear show of protest at the sanctuary
provided there to him.


   Last month, it expelled the Afghan charge d'affaires and
recalled its own top envoy from Kabul, the Afghan capital, saying
that the moves were ``in keeping with national interest.''


   &QL;



   DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania _ In a rare public statement about the
August bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa, the FBI said
Friday that two vehicles had been used in the attack on the embassy
here.


   The FBI also indicated that it had learned the identities of new
suspects in the blast here, and that they are at large. They were
in a Suzuki Samurai, one of the two vehicles identified Friday,
investigators said.


   Two vehicles were also used in the bombing of the embassy in
Nairobi, according to indictments that have been handed down. One
carried the bomb, the other guided the first vehicle through the
streets of Nairobi to the embassy. Investigators are pursuing the
theory that the modus operandi was the same here.


   One of the vehicles used in the blast here was an Atlas
refrigeration truck made by Nissan, with a silver-colored cargo box
and white or beige cab, the FBI and the Tanzania Criminal
Investigation Division said at a news conference Friday afternoon.


   This was the vehicle that investigators now believe carried the
bomb, which killed 11 people and wounded at least 86. The driver of
the vehicle, who has not been identified, died in the attack,
according to investigators.


   The simultaneous blast in Nairobi killed more than 250,
including 12 Americans. Three people have been indicted in New York
in connection with the attacks, which the Clinton administration
has charged were masterminded by Osama bin Laden, the Saudi exile
who lives in Afghanistan.


   Friday's development should put to rest earlier reports that a
water tanker, which regularly delivered water to the embassy here,
had carried the bomb, an investigator said.


   The refrigeration truck followed the water tanker into the
compound, according to a U.S. security official.


   It is not known how the refrigeration truck, a 1987 Nissan,
penetrated the embassy compound here without being adequately
searched. At Friday's news conference, FBI Agent Ken Maxwell read a
brief statement and declined to take any questions. The head of
Tanzania's Criminal Investigation Division, Adadi Rajabu, read a
similar statement in Swahili, and also declined to take questions.


   The second vehicle was a Suzuki Samurai, a small jeep popular in
East Africa. It had been ``utilized by suspects thus far
identified,'' Maxwell said. He did not say how it had been used or
who the suspects were.


   Tanzania has charged two men in connection with the bombing,
Mustafa Mahmoud Said Ahmed and Rashid Saleh Hemed.


   For reasons that are not clear, the Clinton administration has
not sought to extradite either of these men, even though it has
brought other suspects back to the United States, where they have
been indicted. A diplomat here said the United States did not
consider the evidence against Ahmed to be very strong.


   Since the bombings, the FBI and their counterparts here and in
Kenya have made few public statements.


   Friday's news conference was for the purpose of issuing an
appeal to the Tanzanian public to come forth with any information
about the vehicles, an indication that while the investigators feel
they have made ``a significant amount of progress,'' as Maxwell
said Friday, they are also stymied.



   WASHINGTON _ Urged on by the Clinton administration, Saudi
Arabia's top intelligence official met privately with the leader of
the Taliban in late September to try to persuade Afghanistan to
deport Osama bin Laden, the Saudi exile suspected of masterminding
the August bombings of two American embassies in East Africa,
according to U.S. and Arab officials.


   Just weeks after the United States launched a cruise-missile
strike against bin Laden's terrorist training camps in Afghanistan,
Prince Turki bin Faisal, chief of Saudi intelligence, sat down with
Mullah Mohammed Omar, leader of the Taliban's Supreme Council, and
asked him to end his protection for bin Laden and hand him over,
Arab officials said.


   The Taliban, the Islamic movement that controls most of
Afghanistan, refused. Their recalcitrance in the face of Turki's
personal request finally prompted Saudi Arabia, one of the
Taliban's most important financial sponsors and allies, to
downgrade its diplomatic ties with the group.


   American officials say they are supporting diplomatic efforts to
persuade the Taliban to deport bin Laden. ``Achieving the expulsion
of bin Laden and bringing him to justice is something we are
actively pursuing,'' said a State Department official.


   In their effort to persuade Afghanistan to deport bin Laden,
State Department officials also have spoken to Taliban
representatives themselves and have sought the intercession of
Pakistan, the only other major ally of Afghanistan in the region.


   They have also, said an Arab official, talked to members of bin
Laden's family in Saudi Arabia.


   If Afghanistan does turn over bin Laden to Saudi Arabia, it is
possible that bin Laden might be tried there, rather than in the
United States. If he were to be handed over to the Saudis and
brought back to Saudi Arabia, one Arab official said, he could face
swift execution.


   Administration officials say they want him to face trial in the
United States. They say they asked the Saudis to urge the Taliban
only to deport bin Laden. Senior U.S. officials said they were not
negotiating with the Taliban, but simply repeating the message that
they should get rid of bin Laden.


   ``We've certainly urged, in public and private, all those who
have influence with the Taliban, that it is our strong view bin
Laden should be expelled and brought to justice,'' a White House
spokesman said. ``We will certainly continue our multi-pronged
strategy of combating bin Laden's network.''


   Clinton administration officials said the new diplomatic effort
did not preclude further military action against bin Laden and his
terrorist network. Officials said the Aug. 20 cruise missile attack
was intended to break up the network and perhaps kill bin Laden.
Since then, the FBI and other law-enforcement and intelligence
agencies say they are continuing to work with other nations to
arrest as many of bin Laden's operatives as possible. Bin Laden
already faces criminal charges in the United States under a sealed
indictment handed up by a federal grand jury in New York.


   Pressing the Taliban is part of a broad effort to damage the bin
Laden network, officials say. ``Our tactics may have changed, but
our strategy of putting him out of action remains the same,'' said
a senior American official. ``This is another way of trying to deal
with the problem.''


   But critics outside of government say it also suggests
ambivalence among administration officials over how best to deal
with the radical Islamic group that now controls most of
Afghanistan.


   ``There has been a gap between our interests in Afghanistan and
the level of our attention to the need for a strategy,'' said
Zalmay Khalilzad, an Afghan expert at Rand Corp. ``A rogue state
could emerge there, so we either need to pay attention now, or
later.''


   The Saudi role in trying to extricate bin Laden from Afghanistan
has been a murky one, complicated by Islamic politics and the
longstanding alliance between the Saudis and the Taliban. But the
Saudi request to the Taliban for bin Laden represents a significant
shift.


   Previously, the Saudis had made it clear that they did not want
bin Laden brought back to Saudi Arabia, for fear that he could be a
martyr figure to Saudi dissidents. More broadly, U.S. officials say
they have been frustrated by the Saudis' refusal to cooperate fully
on terrorism investigations in the past, especially in the case of
the 1996 bombing of the American military barracks at Khobar Towers
in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.


   But now, what administration officials say is the clear evidence
of his involvement in the East African bombings, as well as a
growing belief among Saudi officials that bin Laden poses a threat
to their government, seems to have prompted a change in their
strategy.


   And, while he is not currently under indictment for any crimes
in Saudi Arabia, Arab and U.S officials now say they have evidence
linking him to the 1995 car bombing of a military facility in
Riyadh in which American servicemen were killed.


   Bin Laden, who was stripped of his Saudi citizenship in 1994,
would face ``swift'' action if he were brought back to Saudi
Arabia, said one Arab official.


   Now, even bin Laden's wealthy Saudi family is cooperating with
the United States and Saudi Arabia on how to bring him to heel, the
Arab official said. The bin Laden family made a fortune in the
construction industry. ``U.S. officials, after Saudi Arabia blessed
it, have talked to members of the bin Laden family,'' the Arab
official said.


   After Taliban officials repeatedly said they would consider
turning over bin Laden if they were presented with evidence against
him, Arab officials familiar with the matter say that Prince Turki
presented evidence to the Taliban of bin Laden's involvement in
terrorism, but it made no difference. Evidence was also presented
by Bill Richardson, former chief delegate to the United Nations,
when he visited Afghanistan earlier this year.


   But Clinton administration officials, fearing that his return to
Saudi Arabia could lead to trouble for the Saudi regime, stress
they do not want the Saudis to have bin Laden brought back to their
country. And they note that the United States does not have an
extradition treaty with Saudi Arabia. The Clinton administration is
still determined to have bin Laden put on trial in the United
States, they said.


   ``We don't have a policy on whether we would accept bin Laden
being brought to justice in a third country, we haven't crossed
that bridge yet,'' one administration official said. ``But Saudi
Arabia would not be the place where we would want him to go.''


   Abdul Hakeem Mujahid, the Taliban's ambassador designate to the
United Nations, confirmed in an interview that his government's
discussions with Turki over bin Laden had been ``disappointing,''
but argued that Afghanistan's unwillingness to oust its ``guest''
would not damage long-term relations between Afghanistan and Saudi
Arabia. He added that his government would be willing to try bin
Laden in Islamic court in Afghanistan if there was ``solid''
evidence against him.



   NEW YORK _ Several months after the bombing of the World Trade
Center in February 1993, one of the suspects tried to bargain with
federal prosecutors in New York, offering inside information about
the bomb plot in exchange for a lighter sentence.


   The deal never materialized, and the defendant was eventually
found guilty and sentenced to life in prison. But the details he
offered in that secret meeting about his Brooklyn-based circle of
Arab militants are resonating today in another terrorism case.


   The accused bomber told prosecutors that he had twice turned to
a Texas acquaintance named Wadih el Hage to buy weapons for his
Brooklyn associates. Last month, el Hage was arrested on charges of
being part of the Osama bin Laden terror network that is suspected
of the bombing of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania on Aug.
7.


   It is not clear how federal investigators followed up the tip
about el Hage that they received in 1993. But after the embassy
bombings, it is evident that they are ascribing new significance to
el Hage's contacts with the Brooklyn militants who figured not only
in the World Trade Center case, but also in the assassination of
Rabbi Meir Kahane in 1990 and a conspiracy to blow up the United
Nations and other New York landmarks in 1993.


   Indeed, the government recently asserted for the first time that
the roots of bin Laden's organization could be traced, in part, to
a sparsely furnished office on Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn that was
called Alkifah Refugee Center and had for many years been a
gathering place for that same fringe group of terrorists.


   Prosecutors have not said what role, if any, bin Laden is
supposed to have played in the activities of Alkifah Center. Nor
have they said how the center, which has been closed for about five
years, relates to his global campaign to attack Americans overseas.


   But in the government's version so far, bin Laden's far-flung
network is presented as a tapestry of personal relationships
between men of different nationalities and backgrounds who share
his determination to rid the Islamic world of American influence.


   In the United States, prosecutors now suggest, such
relationships evolved from Alkifah Refugee Center.


   In the mid-1980s the strip of Arab restaurants and Islamic
bookstores on Atlantic Avenue, between Third and Fourth streets,
was the first port of call for many immigrants from the Middle East
and North Africa. Notices posted in the shops advertised jobs,
rooms for rent and religious activities for Arabic-speaking
newcomers.


   Alkifah Center, in those years, was a neighborhood hub. It
started out as a desk in Al Farooq Mosque around 1986 and then
moved into a small apartment in a building a few doors away at 566
Atlantic Ave., above what is now a perfume factory, with just
enough room for a desk, a few chairs, a phone and a fax machine.


   The center's stated purpose was to raise money and recruit
fighters to help the U.S.-backed Afghan mujahedeen, who rebelled
against the Communist government in Afghanistan after an invasion
by the Soviet Union in 1979.


   People in the neighborhood who remember Alkifah Center say it
appeared to be a shoestring operation, although court papers
suggest that tens of thousands of dollars flowed through its bank
accounts in its heyday in the late 1980s and early 1990s.


   It was this ramshackle office that the government says evolved
into the American outpost of bin Laden's international terrorist
organization.


   The center was set up by Mustafa Shalabi, an Egyptian immigrant.
As his former neighbors recall him, Shalabi was infused with the
same religious fervor for the Afghan cause that galvanized many
young Muslims who regarded it as a holy war to liberate a Muslim
country from Communist domination.


   One of those who answered the call to fight in Afghanistan was
Mahmud Abouhalima, who was active in militant Islamic movements in
his native Egypt before moving to West Germany in 1981 and to New
York four years later.


   Abouhalima would later become a well-known figure in New York as
one of the men accused in the World Trade Center bombing. Shortly
after his arrest in that case, he met with government investigators
without his lawyer and provided a detailed account of Alkifah
Refugee Center and its internecine rivalries.


   He recounted his brief stint with the mujahedeen in Afghanistan
and told of traveling with a Palestinian man he knew as Mohammed
Odeh to Peshawar, in northern Pakistan, the staging area for the
Afghan rebels. Abouhalima said they had spent two and a half months
in separate training camps, learning how to use AK-47 assault
rifles and rocket-propelled grenade launchers.


   Later, they joined a militia unit and fought against Soviet
forces with the American-financed mujahedeen.


   For reasons that remain unclear, prosecutors rebuffed
Abouhalima's offer of cooperation. But his mention of Odeh is
intriguing in light of more recent events.


   A Palestinian man with a similar name and background, Mohammed
Saddiq Odeh, has been charged with driving the truck that delivered
the bomb in the attack on the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi. He has
pleaded not guilty and is awaiting trial in New York.


   Federal officials declined to say whether the Odeh charged in
the embassy attack this year is the same Palestinian whose name
surfaced five years ago.


   nn


   In his 1993 statement to investigators, Abouhalima made no
mention of bin Laden, although bin Laden is known to have worked in
Afghanistan and Pakistan during the war years distributing official
Saudi aid money for the mujahedeen.


   Not long after Abouhalima returned to New York in late 1988, the
Afghan war began to wind down. The Soviet Union withdrew the last
of its troops in 1989. Two years later, the United States agreed to
stop supplying arms to fractious Afghan warlords, and Afghanistan
descended into civil war.


   Many of the Arab men who had gone to fight, including bin Laden,
stayed on but turned their religious fury against secular Arab
governments and, ultimately, the U.S. military presence in the
Persian Gulf and in Africa.


   The turmoil in postwar Afghanistan echoed in Brooklyn, where
Shalabi kept Alkifah Center open. With the arrival in Brooklyn in
1990 of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the blind Egyptian cleric who was
later convicted of conspiring to blow up New York landmarks,
Abouhalima said, the regulars at Alkifah began to quarrel over
money, political direction and leadership.


   It was around that time that Abouhalima said he had first met el
Hage, a Lebanese-born naturalized American citizen, at an Islamic
conference in Oklahoma City.


   Just how close the two men became is not clear. Abouhalima's
lawyer in his World Trade Center trial, Hassen Ibn Abdellah, said,
``That case is over, and I know nothing of the government's
information or their sources.''


   But el Hage was familiar with several of the Arab immigrants
associated with Alkifah Center, say prosecutors and the account
that Abouhalima provided investigators.


   A federal prosecutor, Patrick Fitzgerald, said in court last
month, for example, that el Hage had a relationship with El Sayyid
A. Nosair, the Egyptian immigrant convicted on federal charges in
slaying of Kahane. He did not elaborate.


   Abouhalima, who told investigators that he had been in charge of
protecting Sheik Abdel Rahman during the cleric's stay in the
United States, told investigators that he had gone at least twice
to el Hage to buy guns. Abouhalima said he obtained a 9-millimeter
handgun from el Hage in 1990 for use by the cleric's bodyguards.


   Abouhalima also told investigators that he later gave el Hage
$4,000 to buy handguns and AK-47s to defend his associates from the
Jewish Defense League in New York, an organization founded by
Kahane. Abouhalima said el Hage had been unable to obtain the
weapons and returned most of the money.


   The timing of the transaction was not made clear.


   The government cited the weapons transaction in a court hearing
last month to persuade a federal magistrate to deny bail to el
Hage. Fitzgerald, the prosecutor, said el Hage had acknowledged
dealings with Abouhalima.


   ``The defendant has admitted that while in Texas he made efforts
to obtain firearms for Mahmud Abouhalima,'' Fitzgerald said. ``His
claim is that after purchasing the firearms, Mr. Abouhalima failed
to pick them up.''


   Abouhalima told investigators of other contacts with el Hage. He
said that el Hage called him from Texas in early 1991 and said
Shalabi wanted him to come to New York to help resolve a conflict
within Alkifah Center. At the time, Shalabi's leadership was under
fire from dissidents within his circle, including Abouhalima.


   El Hage did come to New York. A short time later, Shalabi was
found slain in his Brooklyn apartment. No one has been charged, and
the crime remains unsolved.


   Abouhalima said he and el Hage had met one more time in Al
Farooq Mosque on Atlantic Avenue, a few doors from Alkifah Center.
The topic of discussion, he said, was Shalabi's troubles and his
recent killing.


   Prosecutors say that by 1994, el Hage moved his wife and
children to Sudan, where neighbors said they knew him as the
director of Africa Help, a private aid organization. But the
government said he was the private secretary to bin Laden, who by
then had relocated from Afghanistan to Sudan.


   Later that year, the government said, el Hage moved to Kenya,
where he shared a house for a time with a man named Haroun Fazil
and helped bin Laden set up some of his front companies in Africa.
Fazil is accused of playing a role in the August embassy bombings
in Africa.


   The government appears to have been tracking el Hage for at
least a year before the embassy bombings. In September of last
year, he was pointedly questioned by federal agents investigating
bin Laden's group.


   El Hage, who moved back to the United States in 1997, has
pleaded not guilty to charges of conspiracy to kill Americans and
of lying to federal agents. In court his lawyer, Bruce McIntyre,
denied that his client had any connection to terrorist activities.
McIntyre could not be reached for further comment.


   These days, Arab immigrants still congregate along the little
strip of shops on Atlantic Avenue, where Arab food and novelties
are sold alongside Islamic books. A few thousand pray at Al Farooq
Mosque at the main Friday prayers, but it no longer has a
reputation as a hotbed of radical Islamic activity.


   Most of the men who were drawn to Alkifah Center in its
turbulent days have melted quietly back into their communities, say
people in the neighborhood familiar with the center's history.


   ``In 1994 this mosque finally settled down,'' said Abdulhakim
Ali Mohamed, the American-born religious scholar who became the
imam, or leader, of the mosque three years ago.


   No one is permitted to misuse the mosque to preach politics or
hate, he added. ``If there's anything to say,'' Mohamed said,
``I'll say it.''



   NAIROBI, Kenya _ Nine months before the attack on the American
Embassy here, U.S. intelligence officials received a detailed
warning that Islamic radicals were plotting to blow up the
building, according to Kenyan and American officials.


   The warning forecast the Aug. 7 bombing in several particulars,
the officials said. It came from an Egyptian man who American
officials now believe was involved in the simultaneous terrorist
assaults on the American Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.


   The Egyptian, Mustafa Mahmoud Said Ahmed, is now in jail in
Tanzania, charged by local prosecutors with bombing the embassy
there.


   Since the bombings, the State Department has maintained that it
received no specific warnings about threats to its embassies in
East Africa. But late on Thursday, a spokesman acknowledged that
the CIA had sent the State Department two reports about Ahmed that
prompted the embassy in Kenya to step up security for several
weeks.


   When no attack materialized, the embassy's precautions returned
to normal. No further steps were taken to improve the building's
physical security.


   Disclosure of the warning raises new questions about the State
Department's protection of the embassies in Kenya and Tanzania,
which did not meet the department's own minimum standards for
security. Until now, department officials have insisted that the
embassies faced only a minimal threat from terrorists.


   In the days after the bombings, the administration acknowledged
that it had spurned requests from the American ambassador in Kenya,
Prudence Bushnell, to move the entire embassy to a safer location.
The State Department would not say whether her cables mentioned
Ahmed's warning.


   According to American officials, Ahmed walked into the Nairobi
embassy last November and told American intelligence officials that
he knew of a group that was planning to detonate a bomb-laden truck
inside the diplomats' underground parking garage.


   In a separate interrogation by Kenyan intelligence officials,
which was relayed to the Americans, Ahmed said he had already taken
surveillance photos of the embassy for the attack, which was to
involve several vehicles and stun grenades, Kenyan officials said.


   Analysts at the CIA were unable to link Ahmed to any terrorist
group but they nonetheless sent two reports last November about his
statements to various government agencies.


   The reports, American officials said, included several caveats.
The CIA said that a foreign intelligence service that cooperates
with the agency believed that Ahmed was a fabricator of
information. In the reports, CIA analysts said that they could not
rule out the possibility that Ahmed's threats were serious. But
they said that the threats might also be a sophisticated ploy by
terrorists to observe and then counter the defenses the embassy
would take against a possible attack.


   After Ahmed appeared at the embassy, American officials alerted
their Kenyan counterpars, who questioned the Egytian and then
deported him. Soon after, Ahmed made his way to Tanzania where,
American officials now believe, he participated in the Aug. 7
bombing of the embassy that left 11 people dead.


   The embassy attack in Kenya unfolded that same day much as Ahmed
had said it would: A team of terrorists using two vehicles
attempted to drive an explosives-packed truck into the parking
garage. One of the attackers tossed stun grenades to frighten off
the locally hired security guards. When an exiting car blocked
their access to the garage, the attackers set off the bomb.


   A Clinton administration official acknowledged that the embassy
in Kenya had received a specific warning about an attack. ``It is
embarrassing,'' this official said, quickly adding: ``It is
tragic.'' Asked why the embassy took few steps to improve its
security after the warning, he said: ``That's the 64-million-dollar
question.''


   Other officials defended the government's handling of the case,
noting that American intelligence is deluged with warnings about
terrorist plots, most of which prove groundless.


   Thus far, Tanzanian authorities have not allowed Ahmed to be
interviewed, and it was unclear what motivated him to alert
authorities about a plot in which he appears to have played a role.
He told the Kenyans that in the past he had provided authorities
with information about Islamic radicals because he wanted to see
them arrested and rehabilitated rather than caught committing a
crime for which they would be executed.


   Ahmed has said he is innocent of the charges and his lawyer,
Abdul Mwengela, said his client's information about the bombings
stemmed solely from a conversation he had overheard the previous
year in a Nairobi hotel.


   A Tanzanian court refused to release Ahmed on bail this week and
ruled that FBI agents would be permitted to interrogate him.


   Tanzanian investigators suspect he was a central figure in the
plot. They are now examining whether Ahmed drove one of the
vehicles used in the Dar es Salaam bombing and whether the 400
pounds of explosives used in both blasts came into Tanzania in a
shipment of rice imported by one of his companies.


   The Clinton administration has not sought to extradite Ahmed
from Tanzania event though federal law permits the United States to
bring charges against anyone who attempts or conspires to murder
Americans anywhere in the world.


   American prosecutors have already brought to the United States
several other people accused of complicity in the bombings or of
having ties to Osama bin Laden, the Saudi exile who American
investigators have identified as the mastermind of the attacks.


   The American Embassy in Dar es Salaam declined to answer any
questions about Ahmed and why Washington was not seeking his
extradition. American diplomats in Tanzania, speaking on the
condition of anonymity, suggested the prosecution was being left to
the Tanzanians because there were no American victims. A White
House spokesman said the case was appropriately handled and that
the United States had no plans to extradite Mustafa because the
Tanzanians had expressed interest in trying him.


   Several non-American diplomats in the region speculated that the
United States is allowing the Tanzanians to try Ahmed because they
fear his trial in America might bring to light his dealings with
American authorities and other Western intelligence services.





   NEW YORK _ A federal grand jury in Manhattan returned a
238-count indictment Wednesday charging the Saudi exile Osama bin
Laden with conspiring to bomb two U.S. embassies in Africa in
August and with committing acts of terrorism against Americans
abroad.


   Government officials immediately announced that they were
offering two rewards of $5 million each for information leading to
the arrest or conviction of bin Laden and another man charged
Wednesday, Muhammad Atef, who was described as bin Laden's chief
military commander.


   Bin Laden is believed to be living in Afghanistan under the
protection of the Taliban, the Islamic fundamentalist movement that
rules that country. Atef's whereabouts are unknown.


   Prosecutors also unsealed an earlier indictment, issued in June,
that included similar but less detailed charges against bin Laden.
That indictment was returned before the embassy bombings and was
the result of a two-year investigation into his activities in
Somalia and Saudi Arabia, as well as reports that he had
connections to a circle of Islamic militants in Brooklyn.


   The new indictment, which supersedes the June action, accused
bin Laden of leading a vast terrorist conspiracy from 1989 to the
present, in which he was said to be working in concert with
governments, including those of Sudan, Iraq and Iran, and terrorist
groups, to build weapons and attack American military
installations.


   But the indictment gives few details of bin Laden's alleged
involvement in the embassy attacks. The indictment does not, for
example, specify whether prosecutors have evidence that bin Laden
gave direct orders to those who carried out the attacks.


   Nothing in the document indicates why the original indictment
was kept secret for months, but the secret charges were returned
about the time that American officials were plotting a possible
raid into Afghanistan to arrest bin Laden.


   Mary Jo White, the U.S. attorney in Manhattan, said, ``It's very
common to have sealed indictments when you're trying to apprehend
those who are indicted.''


   Both indictments offer new information about bin Laden's
operations, including one deal he is said to have struck with Iraq
to cooperate in the development of weapons in return for bin
Laden's agreeing not to work against that country.


   No details were given about whether the alleged deal with Iraq
led to the development of actual weapons for bin Laden's group,
which is called Al Qaeda.


   The government said Wednesday that bin Laden's group had used
private relief groups ``as conduits for transmitting funds'' for Al
Qaeda. The groups were not identified.


   Prosecutors also said bin Laden's group had conducted internal
investigations of its members and their associates, trying to
detect who might be acting as informants, and had killed those who
had been suspected of collaborating with ``enemies of the
organization.''


   The government indicated earlier that its knowledge of bin
Laden's activities stemmed in part from the cooperation of one such
informant, who it said Wednesday had worked for bin Laden,
transporting weapons and explosives, helping to buy land for his
training camps and assisting in running his finances.


   While the June indictment against bin Laden suggested that the
government had a great deal of knowledge of his dealings in the
months before the embassy attacks, the new charges are an
indication of how quickly the government has worked to solve the
embassy attacks, which occurred just three months ago.


   Ms. White said bin Laden was charged with ``plotting and
carrying out the most heinous acts of international terrorism and
murder.''


   Citing the more than 250 people killed in the embassy attacks
and the more than 1,000 wounded, she added, ``In a greater sense,
all of the citizens of the world are also victims whenever and
wherever the cruel and cowardly acts of international terrorism
strike.''


   The investigation of bin Laden is continuing, said Ms. White and
Lewis D. Schiliro, assistant director of the FBI in New York, whose
agents have fanned out around the world to look into the embassy
attacks.


   ``Our investigative strategy is clear,'' Schiliro said. ``We
will identify, locate and prosecute all those responsible, right up
the line, from those who constructed and delivered the bombs to
those who paid for them and ordered it done.''



   NEW YORK _ A federal district judge agreed Tuesday to review
complaints by lawyers for three men arrested after the bombings of
two U.S. embassies in Africa that their jail conditions in
Manhattan are unconstitutional and inhumane.


   Judge Leonard Sand of U.S. District Court in Manhattan said he
had received an eight-page letter from lawyers for two of three
defendants in custody in Manhattan. The lawyers complained that
their clients were being held in total isolation for almost 24
hours a day in a unit called 10 South, the most restrictive holding
area in the Metropolitan Correctional Center in lower Manhattan.


   The defendants are allowed only brief periods of exercise in a
barren room, called the rat cage, a defense lawyer, Michael Young,
wrote in the letter. A second lawyer, Leonard Joy, concurred with
the views in the letter, which was made public Tuesday.


   In agreeing to review the conditions, Sand said, ``Certainly it
has to be addressed, that is, the condition of confinement for all
of the defendants.''


   The judge made his comments in the first hearing in the bombing
case since last week's indictment by a federal grand jury of Osama
bin Laden, who the authorities believe was the mastermind of the
embassy attacks. Bin Laden remains at large and is believed to be
living in Afghanistan under the protection of the Taliban, the
Islamic fundamentalist movement that rules that country.


   In discussing conditions at the Manhattan jail, the lawyers said
that two of the defendants have not been able to call their
families, while the third has been allowed to make only one phone
call. The lawyers added that the defendants cannot have visitors,
write letters, or receive mail or books.


   The skirmishing continued in court.


   ``I cannot give my client a dictionary,'' a third lawyer, Bruce
McIntyre, who represents Wadih el Hage, told the judge.


   El Hage has been charged with conspiring to kill Americans
abroad and has been described by the government as a former
personal secretary to bin Laden.


   The two other defendants in court Tuesday _ Mohammed Saddiq Odeh
and Mohamed Rashed Daoud al-'Owhali _ have each been charged with
separate counts of murder in the deaths of more than 200 people in
the embassy attacks in Kenya and Tanzania on August 7.


   All three men have pleaded not guilty.


   Patrick Fitzgerald, an assistant U.S. attorney, told the judge
that the government would have a response by Friday, and his
comments suggested that the government will be prepared to make
some modifications in the restrictions.

