
	   ZURICH, Switzerland (AP) _ Swissair lawyers are looking at
procedures for making payments of up to around dlrs 137,000 to
families of those killed in last month's crash off Nova Scotia, a
spokesman for the airline said Tuesday.
	   The compensation payments correspond to Swissair's liability
under its general conditions of carriage and are independent of any
responsibility for the crash, spokesman Martin Kaspar said.
	   No date could be given for payments, which would be deductible
from a future settlement, he added. Exact entitlements have yet to
be established.
	   All 229 passengers and crew aboard Flight 111 from New York to
Geneva were killed when the airliner plunged into the sea off
Peggy's Cove. The causes of the crash have not been determined.
	   Immediately after the crash, Swissair offered families an
immediate dlrs 20,000 payment to cover their expenses. More than
130 families have taken up that offer, Kaspar said.
	   Swissair is among carriers that over the last few years have
opted out of a dlrs 75,000 liability cap for people killed or
injured during international flights.
	   The airline and manufacturers Boeing have already been served
with a dlrs 50 million lawsuit by former boxing champion Jake
LaMotta, who lost his son.
	   The lawsuit claims the companies should have known about wiring
problems on the McDonnell Douglas aircraft _ a possible cause of
the accident _ and did little to correct them.
 &UR; (gm)

	   TORONTO (AP) _ Hundreds of thousands of pieces of Swissair
Flight 111, representing 60 percent of the plane, have now been
retrieved from the ocean floor, but an explanation for the Sept. 2
crash remains far off, investigators said Tuesday.
	   Benoit Bouchard, chairman of Canada's Transportation Safety
Board, predicted it would take longer than the normal 12 months to
complete a final report on the crash off the Nova Scotia coast that
killed all 229 people aboard the New York-to-Geneva flight.
	   ``It's a very complicated and complex investigation,'' Bouchard
said. ``But I remain optimistic that we will identify any safety
deficiencies that may exist.''
	   As of two weeks ago, only 10 percent of the wrecked MD-11 jet
had been recovered. Then a barge equipped with an underwater crane
was brought in to scoop up large pieces of the plane.
	   Vic Gerden, the chief crash investigator, said the operation was
a success, retrieving all three of the engines, parts of the
fuselage and cockpit, as well as electronic circuit boards and
bundles of wiring that will be examined for possible clues into the
source of smoke that the pilots detected 16 minutes before the
crash.
	   Some debris from the cockpit area shows signs of extreme heat,
but investigators have yet to establish any details about the cause
or extent of a possible fire on board.
	   ``We're really just now at the stage where we have quite a bit
of aircraft to examine,'' Gerden said.
	   He said investigators still don't know at what angle the plane
hit the water and hope that digital controls in the engines may
give an indication of the plane's speed at impact.
	   The impact was so severe that all the victims' bodies were badly
fragmented, complicating the identification process.
	   Dr. John Butt, Nova Scotia's chief medical examiner, joined
investigators at a news briefing in Halifax on Tuesday to report
that remains of 134 people have now been identified, mostly through
matching with DNA samples provided by relatives.
	   He said 228 distinct DNA patterns have now been detected from
the remains, indicating remains from all but one of the people on
board has been found.
	   Gerden said the heavy-lifting barge, the Sea Sorceress, has
completed its work, and will be replaced this week by a boat
normally used to drag up scallops. Its task will be to retrieve the
smaller debris that remains on the ocean floor, about 180 feet (55
meters) below the surface.
	   Though the final report is probably more than a year away,
Bouchard said the safety board would issue provisional
recommendations at any point when investigators felt they had
detected a safety hazard,
	   ``We will do everything we can to reduce risks associated with
flying,'' he said.

	   TORONTO (AP) _ Hundreds of thousands of pieces of Swissair
Flight 111, representing 60 percent of the plane, have now been
retrieved from the ocean floor, but an explanation for the Sept. 2
crash remains far off, investigators said Tuesday.
	   Benoit Bouchard, chairman of Canada's Transportation Safety
Board, predicted it would take longer than the normal 12 months to
complete a final report on the crash off the Nova Scotia coast that
killed all 229 people aboard the New York-to-Geneva flight.
	   ``It's a very complicated and complex investigation,'' Bouchard
said. ``But I remain optimistic that we will identify any safety
deficiencies that may exist.''
	   As of two weeks ago, only 10 percent of the wrecked MD-11 jet
had been recovered. Then a barge equipped with an underwater crane
was brought in to scoop up large pieces of the plane.
	   Vic Gerden, the chief crash investigator, said the operation was
a success, retrieving all three of the engines, parts of the
fuselage and cockpit, as well as electronic circuit boards and
bundles of wiring that will be examined for possible clues into the
source of smoke that the pilots detected 16 minutes before the
crash.
	   Some debris from the cockpit area shows signs of extreme heat,
but investigators have yet to establish any details about the cause
or extent of a possible fire on board.
	   ``We're really just now at the stage where we have quite a bit
of aircraft to examine,'' Gerden said.
	   He said investigators still don't know at what angle the plane
hit the water and hope that digital controls in the engines may
give an indication of the plane's speed at impact.
	   The impact was so severe that all the victims' bodies were badly
fragmented, complicating the identification process.
	   Dr. John Butt, Nova Scotia's chief medical examiner, joined
investigators at a news briefing in Halifax on Tuesday to report
that remains of 134 people have now been identified, mostly through
matching with DNA samples provided by relatives.
	   He said 228 distinct DNA patterns have now been detected from
the remains, indicating remains from all but one of the people on
board has been found.
	   Gerden said the heavy-lifting barge, the Sea Sorceress, has
completed its work, and will be replaced this week by a boat
normally used to drag up scallops. Its task will be to retrieve the
smaller debris that remains on the ocean floor, about 180 feet (55
meters) below the surface.
	   Though the final report is probably more than a year away,
Bouchard said the safety board would issue provisional
recommendations at any point when investigators felt they had
detected a safety hazard,
	   ``We will do everything we can to reduce risks associated with
flying,'' he said.

	   ZURICH, Switzerland (AP) _ Temperatures rose to 300 degrees (570
degrees F) without leaving traces of fire in the front part of
Swissair Flight 111 before it crashed, an in-house publication of
the airline said Thursday.
	   There still is no indication of the source of the heat, said the
publication, ``News.'' It described as ``pure speculation''
theories that a fire was caused by an electrical short that ignited
insulation material.
	   The MD-11 airliner flying from New York to Geneva crashed Sept.
2 off the coast of Canada, killing all 229 people aboard. The crew
reported smoke in the cockpit 16 minutes before the crash.
	   Investigators, who have found that high heat melted plastic in
the first 40 feet (12 meters) of the plane, were surprised that the
heat was in the upper part of the plane and not below the cockpit
floor, where most of the wiring is located, the newsletter said.
	   Previous reports have said the temperature was high enough to
damage plastic, but the newsletter gave the first indication of
just how hot it was.
	   The newsletter, published for the staff by the airline's parent
SAirGroup, said the findings by Canadian investigators were
disclosed by Hans Ulrich Beyeler, Swissair head of technology, in a
speech to the Technical Society of Zurich.
	   Last week, the airline announced it was switching off a
state-of-the-art entertainment system on its remaining 15 MD-11s
and three Boeing 747s as a precautionary measure.
	   Swissair said the video-on-demand system for first and business
class was being disconnected from a power supply network routed
through the cockpit because it was nonessential and because that is
the area where the investigation is concentrated.
	   The newsletter said 90 percent of the wreckage has been
recovered.

	   ZURICH, Switzerland (AP) _ Swissair ``did everything correctly''
in installing a state-of-the-art entertainment system switched off
last month in the wake of the crash of Flight 111, the airline's
chief executive said in an interview published Sunday.
	   Swissair acted voluntarily to disconnect the video-on-demand
system, connected to a power supply routed through the cockpit,
after Canadian investigators detected signs of heat damage on
wiring and other debris from the ceiling around the cockpit of the
MD-11.
	   ``It's the leading product, customers liked it, and its
installation was correctly certified,'' CEO Jeffrey Katz was quoted
as saying in the Zurich weekly SonntagsZeitung. ``As far as we know
now, we did everything correctly.''
	   Swissair is the only customer for the system, manufactured by
Phoenix-based Interactive Flight Technologies Inc.
	   The plane bound from New York to Geneva crashed Sept. 2 off the
coast of Nova Scotia, killing all 229 people on board. The cause of
the crash has yet to be determined.

	   ZURICH, Switzerland (AP) _ Swissair ``did everything correctly''
in installing a state-of-the-art entertainment system switched off
last month in the wake of the crash of Flight 111, the airline's
chief executive said in an interview published Sunday.
	   Swissair acted voluntarily to disconnect the video-on-demand
system, connected to a power supply routed through the cockpit,
after Canadian investigators detected signs of heat damage on
wiring and other debris from the ceiling around the cockpit of the
MD-11.
	   ``It's the leading product, customers liked it, and its
installation was correctly certified,'' CEO Jeffrey Katz was quoted
as saying in the Zurich weekly SonntagsZeitung. ``As far as we know
now, we did everything correctly.''
	   Swissair is the only customer for the system, manufactured by
Phoenix-based Interactive Flight Technologies Inc.
	   The plane, 5th graf pvs.
 &UR; (gm) 	   


   WASHINGTON _ The Federal Aviation Administration said on
Thursday that it would consider whether airliners can get too old
to fly, which would be a change from its longstanding belief that
jets are eternal if they are inspected often enough.


   As a first step, the agency said it would expand a program that
focuses on the problems of aging aircraft. That program, which has
been limited to a study of the skeleton and skin of aging aircraft,
was started after an accident in 1988 in which the fuselage of an
Aloha Airlines jetliner peeled apart like a sardine can.


   On Thursday morning, Rodney Slater, the secretary of
transportation, announced a plan to evaluate nonstructural systems,
including wiring and hydraulic systems.


   ``Today's U.S. fleet has an average age of nearly 16 years,''
Slater said. ``Ten years from now, a larger and older fleet will
have an average age of 18 to 20 years.''


   Some planes are much older than 16. Northwest Airlines said
earlier this year that it expects to fly its DC-9's for 42 years.


   Once a plane has been manufactured, nearly all FAA requirements
are based on aircraft performance, with the agency ordering
inspection or repair after it gets reports from planes in the field
or in the shop that parts have deteriorated. This approach may not
suffice for wiring, though, because some wires are hard to see. And
even if the wires are visually inspected, deterioration is hard to
find, experts say.


   Wiring in older planes has been under intense scrutiny by the
agency since the explosion of TWA Flight 800, a 25-year-old Boeing
747, off Long Island on July 17, 1996. The crash, which killed 230
people, led to the discovery of wiring problems in various older
planes.


   Jane Garvey, the administrator of the FAA, said the agency would
undertake a five-year study of older aircraft systems, in part to
determine ``whether or not there should be a life expectancy for
some of the wiring.'' In practice, experts say, if airlines had to
replace a lot of wiring on older planes it would be a death
sentence for the planes.


   One of the few components automatically replaced at a certain
age is the commercial airline pilot; they have to retire at 60.


   In response to a question, Ms. Garvey said it was not clear
where ``older'' began. Asked about Swissair Flight 111, a
7-year-old MD-11 that crashed off Nova Scotia on Sept. 2, she said
she was not clear whether planes that age would be covered by the
new program.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS.)


   Ms. Garvey and other aviation officials confirmed on Thursday
that they were interested in whether mylar insulation used on that
plane may have encouraged the spread of fires in other accidents.
But a spokesman for the Transportation Safety Board of Canada,
which is in charge of the investigation of the Swissair crash, said
the Mylar insulation recovered from the plane did not show heat
damage.


   The Washington Post reported on Thursday that investigators were
interested in the insulation blankets, although there is no
evidence that they played a role in the Swissair fire and
subsequent crash, which killed all 229 people aboard.


   The Boeing Company recommended a year ago that the blankets be
replaced at the next major maintenance overhaul. But Hans Klaus, a
spokesman for Swissair, said that the plane that crashed had not
had a major overhaul since that recommendation was made, and that
it had its last overhaul in August 1997, 13 months before the
crash. Replacement of the blankets has not been required by the FAA
or any other agency, Klaus said, adding that Swissair has not
decided whether to replace the blankets on its other planes.


   About 15 large airlines that fly MD-11's and other McDonnell
Douglas planes began a two-day meeting on Thursday in Long Beach,
Calif., where the planes were manufactured. They are going over the
approximately 20 outstanding recommendations from the manufacturer
on smoke and fire problems to determine whether any of the work
should be accelerated in response to the Swissair crash, said a
Boeing spokesman, John Dern.


   In Halifax, Nova Scotia, a spokesman for Canada's Transportation
Safety Board, Jim Harris, said that some of the blankets had been
recovered but that they showed no fire damage. Less than 10 percent
of the plane has been recovered so far, and very little of that was
from the cockpit area, which is what most interests the
investigators, he said.


   Harris said salvage workers in the Canadian and United States
navies planned to begin raising small pieces of wreckage in larger
batches soon in an effort to recover more before the weather made
such work impossible.


   Divers have recovered a computer that controls one of the three
engines, he said, and investigators have sent it to Pratt &AMP;
Whitney, in East Hartford, Conn., in the hope that technicians
there can retrieve data from its memory chips.



   WASHINGTON _ Investigators looking into the crash last month of
Swissair Flight 111 off the coast of Nova Scotia have found ``heat
damage'' in wires from the plane's in-flight entertainment system,
prompting the airline to disconnect the system on all of its jumbo
jets, Swissair officials said Thursday.


   The Transportation Safety Board of Canada said in a statement
that there was not enough information to determine whether the heat
damage was a possible source of the smoke that the pilots reported
in the cockpit shortly before the crash, or whether it was ``merely
the byproduct of other events.''


   One aviation safety official called it ``a circumstantial
clue.''


   The entertainment system installed by Swissair is apparently not
used by any other airline, although the Federal Aviation
Administration _ which approved the installation for Swissair _
said that if it found an airline using the same equipment, it would
ask that the system be turned off.


   The system is installed on the first-class and business-class
seats of Swissair's 15 surviving MD-11s and its three 747s. It
includes a video screen that unfolds from the armrest like a tray
table and can be used by a passenger to watch a variety of movies
or play casino-style games.


   A spokeswoman for the airline, Jackie Pash, stressed that
investigators had not determined what role, if any, the system
played in the crash. ``People are going to immediately think this
is a cause of 111, and that has not been determined at all,'' she
said. ``Swissair is interested in taking any precautionary
measures, as you can imagine.''


   About 70 percent of the plane has been recovered, and work is
continuing to find more of it.


   From the parts that have been recovered, investigators have
found that much of the heat damage is concentrated in an area above
the ceiling, over the wall that divides the cockpit from the
first-class cabin.


   Jim Harris, a spokesman for the Transportation Safety Board,
said that the forward area, the area that is of the greatest
interest to investigators, is also the most badly shattered,
apparently having hit first. The investigators recently identified
wiring from the entertainment system as being heat-damaged and
coming from that area over the wall.


   The plane crashed on Sept. 2, on a flight from Kennedy
International Airport in New York to Switzerland, killing all 229
people aboard. The pilots had reported smoke in the cockpit 16
minutes before the crash. Investigators have avoided using the word
``fire,'' saying instead that components are heat-damaged.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   The system was designed and manufactured by Interactive Flight
Technologies of Phoenix, a company that subsequently got out of the
business because it could not make additional sales. A spokeswoman,
Marsha Malone, said Thursday that she could not give any
information about the system installed on the Swissair planes.


   Les Dorr, a spokesman for the FAA, said his agency had inspected
one Swissair MD-11, concentrating on the wiring in the forward part
of the plane, including the entertainment system, and that Swissair
itself had inspected three more that were undergoing maintenance.
No safety problems were found on any of the planes, he said. He
added that the inspections were ``in areas that were readily
accessible, where we didn't have to take anything apart.''


   He said that the FAA was re-examining the design and
installation of the system on the Swissair planes, but that the
agency had not asked any other airlines to inspect their
entertainment systems.


   Such systems are a major point of competition among airlines
offering first-class or business-class service over long routes.
They can require large amounts of electric current, and thus
generate substantial heat. David Sebring, the chief engineer for
cabin systems at Boeing Co., said in an interview in August that on
a big jet the system can use 30 kilowatts _ enough electricity to
run several large suburban houses.



   WASHINGTON _ The Federal Aviation Administration on Thursday
abruptly ordered airlines that fly MD-11s to inspect two cockpit
switches because one model in wide use can give off smoke at
certain settings.


   But such switches did not cause the crash of the MD-11 being
flown as Swissair Flight 111 on Sept. 2, aviation authorities said,
because the cockpit switches in that plane had already been
changed.


   Since the Swissair crash, near Halifax, Nova Scotia, the FAA has
been reviewing trouble reports on the plane and recommendations
from the manufacturer, McDonnell Douglas; its action Thursday was
to make one of those recommendations mandatory.


   The switches are dimmer switches for cockpit instruments. ``The
real safety issue is not fire, it's smoke in the cockpit,'' said
FAA spokesman Les Dorr. He added that Thursday's order was
``typical of several hundred'' that are issued each year, and was
not considered a major safety issue.


   The FAA said the cost to the industry would be about $60 a
plane. The order covers the 65 MD-11s registered in this country
but not the 109 others around the world _ including Swissair's
surviving models. The agency said it did not know how many airlines
had already done the work.


   The FAA issued the order as a final rule, but said it would
accept public comment for 45 days.


   Investigators are still trying to determine the cause of the
Swissair crash, which involved smoke in the cockpit and killed all
229 people aboard.



   WASHINGTON _ After the crash of Swissair Flight 111, the airline
gave the grieving familes of the victims all the help customarily
offered in such disasters. It brought them to Halifax, booked them
in hotels and bused them to the crash site. But then it gave them
something more unusual: space on the airline's web page to speak
out.


   Now, on a new different bulletin board, set up on Yahoo, the
families are pouring out their souls about the crash. It is a new
way of grieving that has also been used by families of the victims
of other crashes.


   ``This is a bit strange for me; I don't really know what to
write or how to begin,'' said one posting, by a woman named Mette,
who said her father died in the Sept. 3 crash that took 229 lives.
``I just feel a need to. I want to try all possible ways of dealing
with all the emotions and confusion.''


   ``I am wondering if there are any other people out there around
my age (19) who lost someone on the flight and would like to
communicate with me,'' Mette continued.


   Two days later, a woman who lost both her parents on the plane
responded.


   Despite Swissair's offer of space on its web site, relatives of
the victims said they ultimately decided to move to Yahoo because
they felt that they needed a more neutral space.


   Monica Hawkins, whose cousin, Jay Jasan, died on the flight,
said the Swissair site ``kind of felt funny,'' partly because they
knew Swissair personnel were reading their postings.


   Miles Gerety, who lost a brother, Pierce, on the plane, asked
his 13-year-old son to handle the technical aspects of the
bulletein board. The boy created a Yahoo club, a combination of
message boards, chat rooms, e-mail message lists, member lists, a
links area, calendars and archive information.


   ``You have to have a 13-year-old,'' said Gerety, who is a public
defender in Connecticut and said he could not have set up the
bulletin board on his own.


   The site has a counter to monitor usage: it recently showed 35
members logged in, with a total of 1,019 page views for the day,
and three new members who had joined the club.


   For now, everyone can read their postings. But Gerety and Ms.
Hawkins, who are the acting chairman and vice-chair of an
organization of Swissair-disaster families announced early this
month, said they would create a private bulletin board once they
had more relatives signed up.


   The organization can be reached at
clubs.yahoo.com/clubs/familiesofswissairflight111. The family
association can be reached by mail at P.O. Box B, Redding Ridge,
Conn. 06876.


   Relatives from this crash and previous ones said that some of
the characteristics that are generally seen as e-mail's weaknesses
suddenly become strengths for people trying to cope with a crash,
especially the detached nature of the communications.


   ``You can sit down and put your thoughts down,'' said Jane B.
Lathem of Alpharetta, Ga., whose son, Ray W. Lathem, died on the
crash of Valujet Flight 592 in May, 1996. ``People find it easier
to open up when they're not face-to-face. The site is at
flight592.com


   Some of the Swissair postings show people grapping both with
grief and a new technology.


   ``This is the first time I have written a message at this site,
or any other for that matter. I'm really not really sure what to
write, but I feel that I really want to,'' wrote Linda Arnmark,
whose father, Per Spanne, was on the flight. ``Maybe writing to you
all is a good way to deal with what has happened.''


   James N. Landrum, of Plano, Texas, whose wife's sister, Terri
Bell, died on the Valujet flight, said he pays $15 a month for the
40 megabytes of disk space it takes to run the site Landrum, a
computer systems engineer, said he is trying to get the transcript
of the National Transportation Safety Board's hearing from a CD-ROM
unto the web site, but the CD-ROM stores the transcript as pictures
of pages, not text files, and converting it is laborious.


   Landrum said that message traffic picked up around the second
anniversary of the crash and again when the Swissair plane crashed.

