
	   JERUSALEM (AP) _ A car bomb exploded Friday in a Jerusalem
market crowded with Israelis shopping for the Sabbath. The blast
killed two, apparently the assailants, and wounded 21 Israelis. In
response, Israel's Cabinet suspended implementation of the new
peace accord with the Palestinians.
	   The Islamic militant group Hamas, which has been trying to
sabotage the peace accord, claimed responsibility for the 9:45 a.m.
(0745 GMT) attack in the Mahane Yehuda market, police said.
	   Friday's bombing marked the third time in less than three weeks
that Hamas tried, but failed, to carry out an attack with large
numbers of Israeli casualties, suggesting that a recent crackdown
by Israel and the Palestinian Authority has had an effect.
	   Palestinian officials condemned the attack, but accused Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of political blackmail for holding up
the agreement that was to give the Palestinians another 13 percent
of the West Bank.
	   In the attack, a red Fiat drove slowly toward the main
intersection at the entrance of the outdoor market, smoke coming
out of the hood and windows.
	   Rahel Zaken, who was waiting in line at a bakery to buy Sabbath
bread, turned toward the street and glimpsed the driver. ``I saw
his eyes. He looked right at me,'' said Zaken, a 23-year-old
secretary. Seconds later, an explosion shook the area.
	   ``I fell to the ground and stumbled over one of the beggars and
crawled away on my hands and legs,'' she said. She was hospitalized
after complaining of ringing in the ears.
	   Other witnesses said they heard two explosions, followed by fast
pops, like the sound of firecrackers. Israel radio said two
suitcases filled with explosives were found near the car,
suggesting the blast went off prematurely and that the assailants
had planned a more powerful explosion.
	   Israel TV said the two dead were the assailants.
	   A charred, dismembered corpse, covered by tires, lay several
meters (yards) away. Streams of soot-black water ran in the street.
Another bare-legged body lay in the street, face down, in a pool of
blood.
	   In July 1997, two Islamic militants blew themselves up just a
few meters (yards) from the site of the latest explosion, killing
themselves and 16 shoppers.
	   When Friday's explosion went off, the Israeli Cabinet had just
gathered about a mile (kilometer) away, at Netanyahu's office, to
discuss the peace agreement under which Israel is to withdraw from
13 percent of the West Bank, in exchange for a Palestinian campaign
against Islamic militants.
	   The agreement cannot be implemented until it is ratified by the
Cabinet. Netanyahu adviser David Bar-Illan said at the start of the
session that he had expected a vote later Friday.
	   However, the session broke off when word of the attack reached
the ministers. Later, the ministers decided to indefinitely suspend
the ratification process.
	   ``The government of Israel will resume the discussion of the
agreement after it verifies that the Palestinian Authority is
taking vigorous steps for a relentless fight against terrorist
organizations and their infrastructure,'' a Cabinet statement said.
	   The chief Palestinian negotiator, Saeb Erekat condemned the
attack, but said Israel was playing into the hands of the militants
by suspending the peace process.
	   ``I wished that the Israeli government would not point its
finger at the Palestinian Authority,'' Erekat said. ``The
Palestinian Authority is exerting the maximum effort to foil terror
and violence.''
	   The Cabinet also demanded clarifications from Palestinian leader
Yasser Arafat on the procedure for removing sections of the PLO
charter calling for Israel's destruction.
	   The Wye River agreement says the Palestine National Council and
other Palestinian organizations will meet in mid-December to
``reaffirm'' a letter by Arafat to U.S. President Bill Clinton that
spells out the clauses being annulled.
	   Israel contends that the agreement requires the PNC to hold a
vote on the clauses.
	   The Cabinet also said it would act to strengthen Jerusalem as
Israel's capital. Bar-Illan said construction would be authorized
``in the near future'' of the controversial Jewish neighborhood of
Har Homa in traditionally Arab east Jerusalem, but would not give a
date.
	   At the scene of Friday's explosion along Jerusalem's busiest
thoroughfare, soldiers and police held back crowds of people, some
frantic about loved ones who had been shopping in the crowded
market only hours before the start of the Jewish Sabbath.
	   A small crowd of protesters shouted, ``Death to Arabs! Death to
Arafat!''
	   Just a block away from Friday's blast, shoppers went about their
business. ``We can't stop with what we are doing when this
happens,'' one young female shopper said.

	   JERUSALEM (AP) _ A car bomb blew up Friday in a Jerusalem market
crowded with Israelis shopping for the Sabbath. The blast killed
two assailants, wounded 21 Israelis and prompted Israel to suspend
implementation of the peace accord with the Palestinians.
	   The Islamic militant group Hamas, which has been trying to
sabotage the agreement, claimed responsibility for the 9:45 a.m.
(0745 gmt) attack in the Mahane Yehuda market.
	   Palestinian officials condemned the attack, but accused Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of political blackmail for holding up
the agreement that was to give the Palestinians another 13 percent
of the West Bank by the end of January.
	   In the attack, a red Fiat drove slowly toward the main
intersection at the market entrance, smoke coming out of the hood
and windows. ``People started to shout `car on fire,''' said Yair
Cohen, a bus company employee.
	   Rahel Zaken, waiting in line at a bakery to buy Sabbath bread,
turned toward the street and got a glimpse of the driver. ``I saw
his eyes. He looked right at me,'' said Zaken, a 32-year-old
secretary. Seconds later, an explosion shook the area.
	   ``I fell to the ground and stumbled over one of the beggars and
crawled away on my hands and legs,'' she said. She was hospitalized
after complainging of ringing in the ears.
	   Others said they heard two explosions, followed by fast pops,
like the sound of firecrackers. Israel radio said two suitcases
filled with explosives were recovered near the car, suggesting the
blast went off prematurely and that the assailants had planned to
set off a more powerful explosion.
	   Friday's bombing marked the third time in less than three weeks
that Hamas tried, but failed, to carry out an attack with large
numbers of Israeli casualties, suggesting that a recent crackdown
by Israel and the Palestinian Authority has produced results.
	   A charred, dismembered corpse, covered by tires, lay several
meters (yards) away. Streams of soot-black water ran in the street.
Another bare-legged body lay in the street, face down, in a pool of
blood below the head. Rescue workers covered the body with sodden
pieces of cardboard box and plastic shopping bags.
	   Defense Minister Yitzhak Mordechai said the two dead were the
assailants. Asked about Hamas' apparent difficulty to launch a
large-scale attack, he said: ``We can't depend on miracles.''
	   The explosion turned the car into a mass of twisted metal, and a
large cloud of smoke engulfed the area.
	   ``There was hysteria, people were running,'' said Eliad Duan, an
Israeli border policeman. Soldiers and police held back the crowds.
``It's dangerous _ stay back!'' they shouted.
	   At police barricades set up along Jerusalem's busiest
thoroughfare, soldiers and police held back crowds of people, some
frantic about loved ones who had been shopping in the crowded
market only hours before the start of the Jewish Sabbath.
	   ``Please, please, is there a girl with red hair who is hurt?''
an older, heavyset woman said tearfully, trying to push her way
past police. A young female soldier patted her arm consolingly.
	   Two policemen led away an elderly woman who gripped a blue
plastic shopping bag filled with groceries.
	   A small crowd of protesters shouted, ``Death to Arabs! Death to
Arafat!'' Police tried to grab one of them, but he escaped into the
crowd.
	   Just a block away from Friday's blast, shoppers went about their
business. ``We can't stop with what we are doing when this
happens,'' one young female shopper said.
	   In July 1997, two Islamic militants blew themselves up just a
few meters (yards) from the site of the latest explosion, killing
themselves and 16 shoppers.
	   When Friday's blast rocked downtown Jerusalem, the Israeli
Cabinet had just gathered about a mile (kilometer) away, at
Netanyahu's office, to discuss the peace agreement under which
Israel is to withdraw from 13 percent of the West Bank in exchange
for a Palestinian campaign against Islamic militants.
	   The agreement cannot be implemented until it is ratified by the
Cabinet. Netanyahu adviser David Bar-Illan said at the start of the
session that he had expected a vote later Friday.
	   However, the session broke off when word of the attack reached
the ministers. The meeting was resumed shortly after noon, with
ministers deciding to suspend the ratification process.
	   The Cabinet said in a statement will only reconvene after ``it
verifies that the Palestinian Authority takes vigorous steps for an
all-out war against terrorist organizations and their
infrastructure.''
	   The chief Palestinian negotiator, Saeb Erekat, condemned the
attack, but said Israel was playing into the hands of the militants
by suspending the peace process.
	   He also said the Palestinians were doing all they could to stop
the violence. ``I wished that the Israeli government would not
point its finger at the Palestinian Authority,'' Erekat said.
	   Bar-Illan said ratification was possible as early as next week
if the Palestinians take decisive steps against militants.
	   The Cabinet also demanded clarifications from Palestinian leader
Yasser Arafat on the procedure for revoking clauses in the PLO
founding charter calling for Israel's destruction.
	   The Wye River agreement refers to the procedure, but is vague
enough to allow different interpretations. It says the Palestine
National Council and other Palestinian organizations will meet in
mid-December to ``reaffirm'' a letter by Arafat to U.S. President
Bill Clinton in which the Palestinian leader spells out which
clauses are being annulled.
	   The Palestinians dispute Israel's contention that the agreement
calls for the PNC to hold a vote on the clauses.
	   The Cabinet also said it would act to strengthen Jerusalem as
Israel's capital. Israel radio initially said the ministers decided
to begin construction of the controversial Jewish neighborhood of
Har Homa in traditionally Arab east Jerusalem next. Bar-Illan said
construction would be authorized ``in the near future,'' but would
not give a date.
 &UR; kl 	   

	   JERUSALEM (AP) _ Suicide bombers targeted a crowded open-air
market Friday, setting off blasts that killed the two assailants,
injured 21 shoppers and passersby and prompted the Israeli Cabinet
to put off action on the new peace accord.
	   The radical Islamic group Hamas claimed responsibility for the
attack, the second suicide bombing since the signing of the
land-for-security accord two weeks ago. On Oct. 29, an assailant
tried to ram an explosives-rigged car into a bus carrying Jewish
schoolchildren in the Gaza Strip.
	   The Mahane Yehuda market _ several square blocks of narrow,
stone-walled lanes and wooden stalls heaped high with fruit,
vegetables and spices _ was packed with shoppers making last-minute
purchases before the start of the Jewish Sabbath.
	   The blast sent a billowing cloud of black smoke pouring into the
air. Shoppers _ many of them Orthodox Jews clad in sweeping skirts
or long black frock coats _ fled in panic, some scattering their
purchases on the street.
	   At the market's entrance, the assailants' red Fiat was reduced
to a mass of twisted metal, with only the steering column left
intact. Next to it was a charred body cut nearly in half by the
force of the blast; a few feet (meters) away was a second body,
bare-legged and face down in a pool of blood.
	   Police said they had determined the identities of the
assailants, but refused to release any details. Witnesses' accounts
suggested the blast had gone off prematurely, perhaps averting a
much larger loss of life.
	   Onlookers said they saw smoke and flames coming from the car and
heard a series of popping explosions before a larger blast shook
the area. By then, people had already started running away.
	   ``When the big explosion went, there were not that many people
nearby,'' said witness Yaakov Shlomo. ``That was a miracle from
heaven.''
	   Almost all the injuries were minor, from flying debris; by
nightfall seven people remained hospitalized.
	   Blasted-apart suitcases were found in the car's wreckage, Israel
radio reported, suggesting that the attackers had perhaps intended
to carry parcels of explosives deep into the crowd. That method was
used to deadly effect in an attack at the market 16 months ago that
killed the two suicide bombers and 16 others.
	   Israeli officials acknowledged that the toll was remarkably
light for an attack surely meant to kill and maim many, but said it
still showed the daily danger Israelis face from Islamic militants.
	   ``We can't depend on miracles _ we need to fight the cycle of
terrorism,'' said Defense Minister Yitzhak Mordechai. He and other
Cabinet ministers, who were in the midst of debate over ratifying
the agreement at the time of the attack, cut short their session
and did not schedule a date for resumption.
	   David Bar-Illan, a top aide to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
said he still expected the accord to be ratified eventually. But
the suspension of debate will almost certainly bring delays in the
tightly timed 12-week schedule for implementation.
	   The Cabinet it would take up the accord again only after
verifying ``that the Palestinian Authority is taking vigorous steps
for an all-out war against terrorist organizations.''
	   Palestinian officials denounced the attack and urged Israel not
to let it hold up the accord.
	   ``I hope that at this critical period, we will concentrate on
the bigger picture,'' senior Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat
said as he headed into a meeting of the Palestinian Cabinet. ``The
answer to extremists on both sides sworn to sabotage this process
must be a big `No.'''
	   He also urged the United States to step in and make sure that
Israel will ratify the accord.
	   Immediately after the bombing, small but furious protests by
right-wing Israelis broke out. ``Death to Arabs! Death to Arafat!''
a dozen or more demonstrators shouted from behind the police
barricades. Several were arrested.
	   At times like this, Israel has a small-town feel; within moments
of the blast, people all over Jerusalem knew of it.
	   In the Ben Yehuda pedestrian mall, itself the scene of a suicide
bombing 14 months ago, people in open-air cafes clustered around
radios, listening, nodding and relaying the news. ``Bomb, Mahane
Yehuda,'' they told passersby.
	   Yair Cohen, 45, a bus-company worker who was shopping at the
market, said that moments before the blast he had given money to a
beggar on the street as a ``mitzvah'' _ a good deed that observant
Jews believe will help lead to their own salvation.
	   ``I said to myself, `Maybe this will save my life,''' he
recounted later at the hospital, his gray T-shirt stained with
blood where he was hit by flying shrapnel. ``And ten minutes later,
there was the explosion _ and I really did escape death.''

	   JERUSALEM (AP) _ Suicide bombers targeted a crowded open-air
market Friday, setting off blasts that killed the two assailants,
injured 21 shoppers and passersby and prompted the Israeli Cabinet
to put off action on the new peace accord.
	   The radical Islamic group Hamas claimed responsibility for the
attack, the second suicide bombing since the signing of the
land-for-security accord two weeks ago. Last Thursday, an assailant
tried to ram an explosives-rigged car into a bus carrying Jewish
schoolchildren in the Gaza Strip.
	   However, Palestinian security officials said that it was members
of the militant Islamic Jihad group which carried out the attack.
The officials identified one of the assailants as Yusef Ali
Mohammed Zughayar, 18, of Anata, a refugee camp north of Jerusalem.
	   Anata, which is under Israeli control, straddles the line
between the West Bank and Jerusalem.
	   Justice Minister Tshahi Hanegbi said that second assailant came
from the Palestinian controlled areas.
	   In a rare direct appeal to the Israeli people, Palestinian
leader Yasser Arafat appeared on Israel TV during the main Friday
evening news program and condemned the bombing as ``criminal.''
	   ``We must work together, Israelis and Palestinians, to confront
these terrorist acts that aim to destroy the peace process,'' said
a grim-faced Arafat Arafat, adding that he would ``exert 100
percent effort'' to track down those involved in the attack.
	   Arafat also called Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to express
his sorrow. The Israeli leader told Arafat that for the peace
process to continue, the Palestinians would have to significantly
step up their war against terrorists, a statement by Netanyahu's
office said.
	   The Palestinian cabinet also condemned the attack following
their meeting Friday night but added that Israel should not use it
as an excuse to halt the peace process.
	   The Mahane, 3rd graf pvs
 &UR; kl

	   JERUSALEM (AP) _ Islamic militants are pulling out all the stops
to keep the new U.S.-brokered Israeli-Palestinian peace accord from
becoming reality.
	   In recent days, suicide bombers have attacked an Israeli school
bus in the Gaza Strip and Jerusalem's outdoor market. Last month,
grenades were hurled at a bus stop in the southern city of
Beersheba.
	   But the failure of those attacks and others to inflict major
casualties marks a change from past terrorist spectacles and is an
indication that Israeli and Palestinian efforts may have already
weakened the militants.
	   In Friday's market attack _ which was initially claimed by the
largest militant group, Hamas, but later blamed on activists from
the smaller Islamic Jihad group _ Israel radio quoted police as
describing the explosives as an ``amateur bomb.'' It killed the two
bombers and injured 21 Israelis.
	   Yaakov Perry, former head of the Israeli Shin Bet, told The
Associated Press that raids by Israeli agents and, in recent weeks,
by Palestinian security forces as well have led to the arrest of
key leaders and the killing of expert bombmakers.
	   ``There is a weakness both in the explosives used and the
engineers, the experts who can put together the bomb, and there is
also a problem in the quality of the terrorist themselves,'' he
said, adding recent attackers appeared poorly trained.
	   Abdel-Satter Qassem, a professor at An Najah University in the
West Bank town of Nablus who is familiar with the thinking of the
Islamic leadership, said Friday's attack came in response to
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's recent crackdown on the
radicals.
	   As part of that campaign, Hamas founder and spiritual leader,
Sheik Ahmed Yassin, was placed under house arrest last week.
	   ``It is a message (to Arafat) that if you are going to keep your
promises to the Israelis and hit hard on Islamists there will be a
response that will curb your efforts to reach agreement with
Israel,'' Qassem said.
	   He said last week's Gaza car bomb that narrowly missed a school
bus with 40 children aboard was in response to Israel's killing of
two Hamas leaders, Adel and Imad Awadallah in September, and the
death of master bomb maker Mohiyedine Sharif in March.
	   Perry and another former Shin Bet chief, Carmi Gilon, said the
Israeli Cabinet decision to suspend consideration of the Mideast
peace deal reached at the Wye summit in Maryland was a mistake that
only encouraged Hamas and other groups.
	   Gilon said the aim of the militants was to ``ruin the whole
process. I'm just sorry our Cabinet made such a decision which is
exactly the aim of Hamas _ to stop Wye.''
	   In 1995 and 1996, a series of suicide-bombings by Islamic
militants claimed scores of Israeli lives and halted the peace
process, bringing to power the hard-line government of Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Arafat's police rounded up the
militants then, but the activists were later released from jail.
	   David Bar-Illan, a top aide to Netanyahu, said it was impossible
to continue the troop withdrawal process because Arafat's forces
were doing so little.
	   He predicted that the militants would keep attacking until
Arafat's police uprooted the sources of support _ including
charities that collected money, teachers that recruited the youth
and clergy who encouraged attacks. He said Israel was merely lucky
that recent attacks hadn't claimed more casualties.
	   ``We can't rely any longer on miracles. We have to have some
action on the part of the Palestinian Authority,'' Bar-Illan said.
	   At a rally in the Gaza Strip several hours after Friday's market
bombing, a former Hamas activist who is now in Arafat's Cabinet
said Netanyahu's policies, such as building Jewish settlements in
the West Bank, were to blame for the attacks.
	   ``We want to tell him that if you put pressure on the
Palestinian people and against the Palestinian organizations, those
groups will point their arrows against you,'' Communications
Minister Imad Falouji told the crowd.
	   Falouji shared a platform with Abdallah Shami, leader of the
Islamic Jihad, a militant group sponsored by Iran, who affirmed
``our right to fight the occupiers as our religion and laws
dictate.''
	   Many in the crowd cheered.
	   ___ &QC; 
	   EDITOR'S NOTE _ Nicolas B. Tatro, based in Jerusalem, is The
Associated Press chief of bureau for Israel.

	   JERUSALEM (AP) _ Islamic militants are pulling out all the stops
to keep the new U.S.-brokered Israeli-Palestinian peace accord from
becoming reality.
	   In recent days, suicide bombers have attacked an Israeli school
bus in the Gaza Strip and Jerusalem's outdoor market. Last month,
grenades were hurled at a bus stop in the southern city of
Beersheba.
	   But the failure of those attacks and others to inflict major
casualties marks a change from past terrorist spectacles and is an
indication that Israeli and Palestinian efforts may have already
weakened the militants.
	   In Friday's market attack _ which was initially claimed by the
largest militant group, Hamas, but later blamed on activists from
the smaller Islamic Jihad group _ Israel radio quoted police as
describing the explosives as an ``amateur bomb.'' It killed the two
bombers and injured 21 Israelis.
	   Yaakov Perry, former, 5th graf pvs.

	   JERUSALEM (AP) _ The father of one of the Islamic militants who
died in the suicide bombing of a crowded Jerusalem market said
Saturday he was sad about his son's death but proud of what he had
done.
	   Friday's bombing at the open-air Mahane Yehuda market killed the
two assailants, injured 21 Israelis and jeopardized the 2-week-old
Israeli-Palestinian peace accord.
	   Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat promised to track down the
masterminds of the bombing and urged that it not be allowed to set
back the new land-for-security agreement.
	   ``We must work together, Israelis and Palestinians, to confront
these terrorist acts that aim to destroy the peace process,''
Arafat said after the attack on the market, which was swarming with
shoppers readying for the Jewish Sabbath.
	   In a rare direct statement to the Israeli people, Arafat
appeared on Israeli TV and promised to ``exert 100 percent effort''
to catch and punish those who had planned the bombing.
	   The radical group Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack,
but Palestinian security officials blamed members of the militant
Islamic Jihad.
	   One of the dead bombers was identified as Yusef Ali Mohammed
Zughayar, who lived in an Israeli-controlled area north of
Jerusalem. His family said he was 22 and acknowledged he was active
in Islamic Jihad.
	   Palestinian security officials said the other was Suleiman Musa
Dahayneh, 23, from a village outside the West Bank town of Jenin.
	   At Zughayar's house near the Anata refugee camp, dozens of
friends and relatives gathered Saturday to mourn, although they
could not hold a funeral because the body had not been handed over
by Israeli authorities.
	   ``I didn't raise him to lose him like that,'' said Zughayar's
54-year-old father, Mohammed. ``I'm proud, but I'm sad because I
loved my son.''
	   Friday's attack was the second suicide bombing since the signing
of the peace accord on Oct. 23.
	   On Oct. 29, an activist from Hamas killed himself and an Israeli
soldier when he tried to ram an explosives-rigged car into a bus
carrying Jewish schoolchildren.
	   Arafat called Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to express
sorrow over Friday's bombing, but the Israeli leader told him that
for the peace process to continue, the Palestinians would have to
significantly step up their war against terrorists.
	   Israel's Cabinet, which was meeting at the time of the attack,
cut short its debate on ratifying the accord, and did not set a
date for resuming it.
	   The Palestinian Cabinet condemned the attack following its own
meeting Friday night, but said Israel should not use it as an
excuse to halt the peace process.
	   The toll from the attack at the Mahane Yehuda market was far
lighter than might have been expected because the explosives
apparently went off prematurely. Many shoppers in the crowded
market saw smoke and flames coming from the car and fled moments
before the main blast.
	   Suitcases were found in the car's wreckage, Israel radio
reported, suggesting the attackers may have intended to carry
separate parcels of explosives deep into the crowd.
	   That method was used in an attack at the market 16 months ago
that killed the two suicide bombers and 16 others.

	   CAIRO, Egypt (AP) _ Egypt's president says there is ``virtually
nobody'' who believes Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
will implement the latest peace deal with Palestinians.
	   In an interview published Saturday, President Hosni Mubarak said
if Netanyahu wants to change that perception he must boldly face
the setback to peace caused by Friday's car bombing in Jerusalem
that killed the two bombers and injured 21.
	   ``I tell the Israelis that the solution does not lie in freezing
negotiations,'' Mubarak was quoted as saying by the government-run
Egyptian Mail newspaper.
	   Mubarak is a key player in Middle East peace negotiations and
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat regularly consults him. Mubarak's
comments reflect the popular Arab feeling that Israel is insincere
about peace, and that it only looks for excuses to retain control
over West Bank.
	   Mubarak said explosions are a worldwide occurrence. But ``does
life come to a halt? On the contrary. The peace foes who are many
should be denied the chance,'' he was quoted as saying.
	   Following Friday's bombing, Netanyahu's right-wing Cabinet
suspended the ratification of an interim peace deal he reached last
month with Arafat at Wye River in the United States.
	   Under the accord, Israel agreed to relinquish a further 13
percent of the West Bank and Arafat promised to develop a plan to
uproot terrorists on Palestinian-controlled areas.
	   Mubarak said that even as the accord was signed Oct. 23 he was
cautioning that implementation of the deal was more important than
words.
	   ``This is because I felt apprehensive what occurred (in
Jerusalem) would happen,'' he said.
	   However, that is no reason to go back on the accord, he said.
	   ``I tell ... Netanyahu that there is virtually nobody who trusts
that you will carry out the Wye River accord. Should you want to
change this perception, you have to take the initiative and make
practical steps to comply with ... the agreement,'' Mubarak was
quoted as saying.
	   Failure to do so will only ensure recurrence of violence, he
said.
	   ``The Palestinians are beset with frustrations from all sides.
So when a ray of hope appears for them on the horizon, they should
be supported, not the other way round,'' he said.
	   On normalizing Arab-Israeli ties, Mubarak said the two peoples
should accept the idea first before anything is imposed by
``supreme decrees.''
	   And people can only be won over by ``sowing the seeds of trust,
by handing over land to their rightful owners and respecting
treaties and accords.'' he said.
 &UR; vj/mae


   JERUSALEM _ A red Fiat belching smoke sent shoppers fleeing
moments before it exploded outside a bustling marketplace on Friday
morning, killing the two bombers, injuring 24 other people and
disabling the U.S.-brokered peace effort.


   The Israeli Cabinet immediately suspended deliberations on the
peace accord that was reached in Wye Mills, Md., last month and
called on Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian leader, to prove he was
cracking down on terrorism. Reverberating through the heart of
downtown, the blast Friday morning was the second since the
Israelis and the Palestinians signed the new land-for-security
agreement.


   The Israelis believe that Islamic Holy War, a militant
fundamentalist organization, bears responsibility for the attack at
the heavily guarded Mahane Yehuda market, where terrorists have
staged several deadly bombings before.


   The attack occurred during the typical Friday shopping rush
before the Sabbath. At 9:40 a.m., the Fiat, chugging along like a
car about to quit, began emitting smoke. The smoke served as the
first alarm, followed by a series of small explosions, that sounded
like firecrackers. In the minutes before the final boom, as the car
aimed to climb the sidewalk, the police moved quickly to clear the
busy area, in an effort to minimize the final toll. The bombers
died, their car blown to bits of twisted metal. But once the flames
ebbed and the thick black smoke cleared, only one victim proved to
be badly injured.


   ``I started running like a crazy person,'' said Sigal Yitzer,
who was recovering from minor injuries in a Jerusalem hospital. ``I
thought only of my two 18-month-old twins at home, and if I should
die, who would be their mother?''


   Arafat condemned the bombing, spending the day in meetings in
Ramallah with his top security advisers and Cabinet. But his aides
expressed concern that the attack had provided Benjamin Netanyahu,
the Israeli prime minister, with an excuse for reneging on his
commitment to the peace accord.


   ``I am sure the result of this terrorist action will be to give
a gift, an umbrella, to Netanyahu,'' said Freich Abu Madein, the
Palestinian minister of justice.


   Implementation of the accord was supposed to have begun last
Monday, but the Israelis delayed it, with Netanyahu insisting he
needed the approval of his Cabinet and Parliament first. Then, he
postponed convening his Cabinet, demanding written guarantees that
the Palestinians would arrest 30 fugitives.


   When the Israeli ministers finally met, in a rambunctious
all-day session on Thursday, they indicated that they might give
the peace accord only conditional approval, if any. They had just
reconvened on Friday morning when they received news of the
explosion. They immediately moved to suspend their vote on the
accord _ and thus, its implementation _ until Arafat declared
``all-out war'' on terrorism, according to Cabinet Secretary Danny
Naveh.


   ``We expect Arafat to do what is being demanded of him,'' said
Silvan Shalom, the Israeli minister of science. ``He needs to
combat the terror infrastructure. He has done that in the past and
he needs to do so now.''


   Netanyahu issued no public statements. He did not visit the
scene, and he did not visit the injured at the hospital.


   nn



   WASHINGTON _ President Clinton expressed sympathy to Israel
Friday after a car-bomb explosion in a Jerusalem market wounded 24
people but said the attack should not derail the recent
land-for-security deal between Israel and the Palestinians.


   The president said the accord that he helped mediate last month
was ``the best way to safety for the Israelis, the best way to
achieve the aspirations of the Palestinians and, in the end, the
only answer to Friday's act of criminal terror.''


   Two suicide bombers died in the attack in Jerusalem, which
appeared to be an effort to undermine the Wye agreement, named for
the Maryland conference center where the settlement was reached
last month.


   ``When Prime Minister Netanyahu and Chairman Arafat signed the
Wye River agreement, they knew they would face this moment,'' the
president said, interrupting a bill signing ceremony at the White
House to discuss the bombing.


   ``They knew when they went home, both of them would be under
more danger and that terrorists would target innocent civilians;
they knew they would have to muster a lot of courage in their
people,'' he said, expressing ``my sympathy to the people of
Israel, who this morning were once again the target of a vicious
terrorist attack.''


   ``No nation should live under the threat of violence and terror
that they live under every day,'' he said. ``I ask for your prayers
and support today for the Israelis and the Palestinians who believe
in this agreement and who are determined to carry out their
responsibilities.''


   Under the Wye accord, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of
Israel agreed to relinquish a further 13 percent of the West Bank,
and Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian leader, promised to crack down
on Palestinian terrorists.


   The State Department said Secretary of State Madeleine Albright
had telephoned Netanyahu to express her condolences and to urge him
to move quickly, despite the violence, to carry out the agreement
reached with the Palestinians.


   The latest terrorist attack prompted the Israeli Cabinet to
delay further consideration of the agreement, a decision that
Albright said was appropriate as long as it was temporary. ``It is
customary for there to be a short pause in the wake of this kind of
attack,'' she said at a news conference after speaking with
Netanyahu.


   But she added: ``It is important for the Israeli Cabinet to
resume its deliberations quickly. I believe, based on my
conversations with the prime minister, that he wants to find a way
to do this.''

