
	   DOI INTHANON, Thailand (AP) _ Stargazers in Asia sought high
ground and clear skies Tuesday to view the most spectacular
celestial fireworks in 33 years, after enjoying a low-key preview
Monday night.
	   The Leonids meteor shower was expected to blaze forth in its
entire glory over Asia and the Pacific after midnight and into
early Wednesday, regaling millions with a heavenly display of
falling stars too numerous to wish upon.
	   Sky-watchers will get a final chance at the big show Wednesday
night, after which sporadic showers may be visible for several
days.
	   The front-row seats were expected to be wherever the sky was
darkest and clearest _ from the Mongolian steppes to the mountains
of northern Thailand to U.S. research planes breaking through cloud
cover over Okinawa, Japan.
	   For millions of others _ those befogged by weather or living in
North America, when the spectacle was to reach its peak at midday,
the worst time for viewing _ the Internet was the place to be.
	   In northern Thailand, hotels, camp grounds and airlines were
booked solid with people expected to head to Doi Inthanon, the
Southeast Asian country's highest peak at 2,565 meters (8,464
feet).
	   For those who went up Monday night, the streaking star-fall came
into view at about 1:30 a.m. Tuesday (1830 GMT Monday) to a chorus
of ``oohs'' and ``aahs,'' and 33-year-old Thamarong Kudpong made
his wish: ``I already have a daughter. Now, I would like a son.''
	   Many in Japan were wishing Tuesday for the weather to clear. The
government called on public offices and private businesses in the
cities to turn off their lights to enhance viewing possibilities.
	   In Thailand, police anticipated a rush out of Bangkok, the
smog-ceilinged capital, by people looking for a clearer view.
Alternative traffic routes were posted to avoid worsening evening
rush hour.
	   Officials in the capital ordered all public parks closed Tuesday
night for fear that hordes of stargazers would not be safe in the
dark, said a local television station.
	   At least one member of the Thai royal family, Princess
Sirindhorn, was traveling to a rural eastern province to observe
the show, ITV also reported.
	   The celestial fireworks are actually the long tail of the Comet
Tempel-Tuttle. The shower is nicknamed Leonids because ancient
observers thought the meteors came from the constellation Leo.
	   It occurs every November, usually with little fanfare. But every
33 years, the comet speeds through the inner solar system and sheds
swarms of particles as it nears the sun. In 1966, the Leonids
display peaked at 150,000 meteors per hour.
	   Earth plows straight through the comet's wake as it traces its
own orbit. The shower of ``falling stars'' is actually the glowing
contrails of comet dust, or meteoroids.
	   Many of the world's 600-plus satellites have been maneuvered to
reduce the possibility of damage from the speeding grit, which can
poke holes in solar panels, pit lenses, blast away mirror coatings
or cause damaging electromagnetic pulses.
	   Russian space authorities said the crew of the Mir space
stations was prepared for a too-close encounter and would enter the
Soyuz escape capsule when the shower is at its peak.
	   ``It is better to be on the safe side,'' Deputy Mission Control
chief Viktor Blagov was quoted as saying by the ITAR-Tass news
agency.
	   In Romania, the Bucharest daily Evenimentul Zilei said in a
front-page headline: ``Romanians, Stay Inside! Leonide, the
Toughest Meteor Rain.'' 	   

	   LOS ANGELES (AP) _ Satellite operators reported no immediate
problems Tuesday as the Earth passed through the tail of a comet
that peppered the atmosphere with tiny bits of space junk zipping
along at 155,000 mph (250,000 kph).
	   While people around the world watched the beginning of the best
meteor storm light show in three decades, the U.S. National
Aeronautics and Space Administration and private satellite
companies rotated their high-tech machinery to face away from the
approaching debris.
	   The Hubble telescope was turned away from the storm to protect
lens surfaces. And the crew of Russia's Mir space station planned
to wait out the worst of the storm in their emergency escape
vehicle.
	   Most military satellites are built to withstand attack and so
have better protection from the tiny meteors. NASA planned to
reposition six of its 22 satellites to present a smaller target.
Others were to be powered down for the worst part of the storm.
	   The particles from the tail of Comet Tempel-Tuttle move at 43
miles (69 kilometers) per second. Even a small grain can have the
destructive force of a .22-caliber bullet shot at one of the
world's 600-plus satellites, experts say.
	   The debris particles, most no bigger than a grain of sand, can
bore holes in solar panels, damage lenses, blast away mirror
coatings or cause harmful electrical charges.
	   That created a threat to communications, satellite TV broadcasts
and military spying.
	   Aerospace Corp. had no reports of trouble as of early this
morning, said company spokesman Greg Hughes, who was on call
overnight in case of emergency.
	   An office at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena,
California, that was to orchestrate troubleshooting efforts
remained unstaffed during the night.
	   The likelihood of a direct hit was small.
	   ``The chances of any one satellite getting smacked by a particle
is probably less than one in one thousand, but on the other hand,
some of these satellites are worth hundreds of millions of dollars,
so you do take whatever precautions you can,'' said Don Yeomans, a
senior research scientist at Jet Propulsion Laboratory.

	   Whether they stood on the tallest mountain in Thailand or the
desert in California, tens of thousands of people were searching
the skies for a glimpse of the biggest meteor shower in decades.
	   Clouds interfered with the view from many sites, but many
stargazers were rewarded with a spectacular view of meteors
streaking through the skies in blazes of red and white as the
Leonid meteor shower reached its climax early Wednesday in Asia.
	   The shower, which peaks every 33 years, is caused by the Earth's
passage through the long tail of the Comet Tempel-Tuttle. The
storm, which began Monday, got its name because it appears to come
from the direction of the constellation Leo.
	   The biggest crowds gathered in Asia, which was best positioned
for viewing the climax, but the spectacle was seen throughout the
globe _ weather permitting.
	   In Tokyo and many other Asian cities, public offices and private
businesses turned off their lights to enhance viewing. Though the
night remained bright in the Tokyo area, meteors could be seen
streaking across the skies every two or three minutes at the peak
of the storm.
	   ``I only wish I could think up wishes faster,'' said Ikue Oe, a
housewife watching the storm with her husband in the Tokyo suburb
of Yokohama.
	   Tens of thousands of tourists swarmed to Doi Inthanon,
Thailand's highest peak at 2,565 meters (8,464 feet), and Doi
Suthep, another mountain with a famed Buddhist temple on top.
	   People shrieked and squealed with delight as they glimpsed the
night's first shooting star at almost exactly 1 a.m. Wednesday
(1800 GMT Tuesday). But their enjoyment was tempered by the sight
of clouds moving in.
	   Officials said 10,000 people had passed through the national
park's gates by 7:30 p.m. Tuesday (1230 GMT), seven hours before
the anticipated peak of the promised celestial spectacle.
	   People huddled in blankets drove in, paid the 20 baht (55 U.S.
cents) entrance fee and continued up the mountain, scouting for
suitable viewing spots and turning the park into a tent city. The
mountain's actual peak was reserved for dignitaries and scientists.
	   The crowds that gathered at sites in the Mojave Desert in
California were smaller but no less enthusiastic.
	   The desert's campgrounds, normally empty on November weeknights,
were jammed with dozens of stargazers in the early morning hours,
many peering through telescopes and whooping and hollering with
each dazzling display from the Leonid meteor shower.
	   Sandra Macika, 36, of San Jose saw about 30 meteors as she
watched the skies from Mercy Hot Springs, about 30 miles (50
kilometers) south of Los Banos.
	   ``I could see in front of me big streaks of light falling on the
highway,'' she said.
	   Most Australians who rose early Wednesday were disappointed to
find storm clouds blocking the rare display of celestial fireworks.
	   Sydney Observatory astronomy curator Nick Lomb said that while
some astronomers at Parkes Observatory, in northwestern New South
Wales, had seen fireballs through the clouds, it was not the meteor
storm they had hoped for.
	   The view apparently was clearer in Norway, where rescuers were
swamped with calls from people who spotted what they thought were
red distress flares fired from ships in trouble off the southern
coast.
	   ``The meteors really changed color, and sometimes they were
bright red, so I can understand that people associated them with
distress rockets,'' said rescue leader Ben Vikoeren.


   Unfortunately for residents of the United States, the Leonid
storm on Nov. 17 is expected to begin at 2:43 p.m. Eastern standard
time and is likely to last for only an hour or so.


   For the United States, therefore, the entire show will be during
daylight hours and will be invisible, unless unusually bright
bolides, or exploding fireballs, flash through the sky.


   People in East Asia, however, will have ringside seats, and if
skies are clear, they are likely to witness a great meteor display
under ideal conditions: a dark, moonless night.


   Although some forecasters predict that there will be an even
better Leonid storm the next November _ actually, the second
installment of this year's storm _ it will be visible only from
Europe and North Africa.


   But the storm next month may include some especially bright
fireballs, said Joe Rao, a lecturer at New York's Hayden
Planetarium, in an article in the November issue of Sky &AMP; Telescope
magazine.


   Some meteor enthusiasts and astronomers plan to travel to Asia
this year and to Europe in 1999 to see the events. The next chance
of a really spectacular Leonid show anywhere on Earth will not come
for another century.


   Although the United States will not be the best vantage point
for Leonid watching on Nov. 17, people willing to get up a few
hours before dawn on that day and the next may see more meteorites
than they would on a normal night.


   The closest approach the Earth will make to the center of the
meteoroid swarm is 790,500 miles _ more than three times the
distance of the Moon from the Earth, but many dust fragments are
likely to stray into collisions with the Earth.


   Dr. Donald K. Yeomans of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in
Pasadena, Calif., who tracks space objects of various kinds,
cautioned that spectators in the United States should not expect
too much.


   ``Some people think the Leonid storm this year will be as good
as the one in 1966, which was the best one this century, but we
think the 1998 shower will be more modest _ perhaps something
between 200 and 5,000 meteors per hour,'' Yeomans said.


   In 1966, sky watchers clocked a rate of up to 100,000 meteors an
hour at the peak of the Leonid storm.


   For meteor fans, Rao recommends watching the darkest part of the
eastern sky from about 1 a.m. until dawn, on both Nov. 17 and 18.


   ``Whatever you do, set that alarm clock,'' he advised. ``Not
until 2098 or perhaps 2131 will hopes for a Leonid storm again be
justified.''



   Periodically for at least the last 1,000 years, a spectacular
rain of meteors spawned by a passing comet has lighted up the sky,
inspiring fear, wonder and admiration.


   The meteor storm, which shot hundreds of thousands of blazing
streaks across the heavens 33 years ago, is soon due to hit the
Earth again, and this time space scientists are concerned about its
effects.


   The behavior of periodic meteor storms is hard to predict with
certainty. The meteor show forecast for Nov. 17 or 18 might be
spectacular or it might be a dud.


   But whichever the case, every one of the 600-odd satellites
orbiting the Earth _ spacecraft used for communications, military
reconnaissance, peace-keeping missions, climate and weather
monitoring, astronomy, navigation and science _ will be hit by
ultra-high-speed meteor dust.


   The possibility of major damage to any of the satellites is
regarded by experts as small, but cannot be discounted. This storm
of meteors, called Leonid meteors because they come from the
direction of constellation Leo, will be the first to hit the Earth
since 1966 when the world's space programs were in their infancy,
and its effects on satellite systems are uncertain.


   But the fear of possible damage has prompted many meetings by
experts in recent months to discuss ways of minimizing hazards, and
the operators of important satellites are taking no chances.
Whenever possible, satellites will be turned out of the way of the
meteor storm for a few hours and placed in partial electronic
hibernation.


   Both military and commercial satellite operators said that even
during maneuvering, major satellite functions would continue,
including the transmission of voice, data and television traffic.


   The only human beings who will be in space during the storm are
the Russian crew of the Mir space laboratory, which will be unable
to get out of the way. American space officials said they expected
the Russians to ride out the storm inside the Soyuz reentry
vehicle, docked with Mir, enabling them to make a quick escape if
Mir should be badly damaged.


   In a normal day, dozens of meteors hit the Earth's atmosphere
and burn up. But besides this steady influx of meteors, there are
also occasional showers and meteor storms associated with passing
comets.


   The Leonid meteors begin as dust or small chunks that break
loose from Comet 55P/Tempel-Tuttle whenever it approaches the Sun.
Once every 33 years, the ribbon-like stream of dust and particles
trailing the comet usually intersects the Earth's orbit around the
Sun, just as the Earth is passing.


   Comet 55P/Temple-Tuttle, about two and a half miles in diameter,
was discovered in 1865 by Ernst Tempel and Horace Tuttle, who
calculated that its orbit around the Sun took a little over 33
years. The historical record of the Leonid meteor storms goes back
at least 1,000 years.


   The comet itself has never come close to hitting the Earth. But
particles that break loose from the comet are another matter.


   In a report to Congress in May, Dr. William H. Ailor of the
Aerospace Corp. of El Segundo, Calif., a consultant to the Air
Force on hazards to spacecraft, warned that this year's Leonid
storm would pose the most serious meteoroid threat ever faced by
the world's spacecraft.


   He said, ``Because of the very high speed of the particles _
they will be moving at speeds over 155,000 miles an hour _ the
storm poses an even greater and somewhat unknown threat.''


   (Astronomers designate objects moving earthward as
``meteoroids.'' When one of these hits the atmosphere and burns up
it is called a ``meteor.'' If a meteor survives through the
atmosphere and hits the ground it is called a ``meteorite.'')


   Showers of Leonid meteors may produce hundreds or thousands of
blazing meteors each hour. Such storms pose no danger to life on
the ground because most of the cometary particles are smaller than
grains of sand and burn up high in the atmosphere. Occasionally,
larger chunks enter the atmosphere to produce bolides _ fireballs _
that leave luminous trails sometimes persisting for several
minutes. Sometimes bolides explode, producing dazzling flashes of
light.


   Dr. Ahmet Ozkul of Intelsat, the largest operator of global
communications satellites, estimates that the probability of any of
the company's 20 satellites being damaged by a Leonid meteoroid in
November will be less than 2 percent if no precautionary measures
are taken.


   But operators intend to do what they can. One precaution will be
to maneuver these two-ton satellites (each valued at about $1.5
million) so as to present smaller targets for meteoroids.


   ``During the Leonid shower,'' he said, ``most operators will
slue their satellites around so that their big solar panels are
turned edgewise to the stream of particles.''


   Ground controllers of some satellites plan to reduce the volume
of commands from ground stations to avoid electronic garbling and
erroneous commands that can be caused by the impact of dust
particles.


   Meteoroid damage to spacecraft has been rare since the mid-1960s
when spacecraft became common. An exception was a European
communications satellite named Olympus, which was knocked out of
operation in 1993, presumably by meteoroid impact.


   (Another recent failure of a communications satellite occurred
on May 19, when uncontrolled spinning of Galaxy IV shut down most
pagers in the United States for nearly a day. A spokesman for the
Panamsat Corp. of Greenwich, Conn., the owner of the satellite,
said it had been determined that its loss had resulted from
internal failure, not from a hit by a meteoroid or debris.)


   In 1993, astronauts conducting a repair mission on the orbiting
Hubble Space Telescope found a hole about the size of a quarter in
one of the instrument's dish antennas. The hole might have been
made by a meteoroid, although Dr. John Campbell of the Space
Telescope Science Institute, which operates the satellite, said the
damage was more likely to have been from the impact of a piece of
man-made debris from some space mission.


   Space experts consider ``sand blasting'' by micrometeoroid to be
a more likely threat than penetrating hits. Without actually
piercing vital parts of spacecraft, the hail of microscopic
particles is expected to cause wear and tear during the few hours
of the storm, that would be equivalent to the wear and tear of up
to three years of normal operation without meteoroid storms.


   nn


   Another hazard is electrical.


   A microscopic particle hitting the skin of a spacecraft at 44
miles per second is vaporized into plasma _ an ultra-hot,
electrically charged gas. During the plasma's ephemeral existence
it may conduct its electrostatic charge to the spacecraft, causing
arcing, short circuits and damage to computer chips and circuits.


   Sand blasting by comet dust can also damage mirrors, lenses and
the optical components used by spy satellites, weather sensors and
orbiting astronomical instruments, including the Hubble Space
Telescope.


   ``Before, during and after the Leonid storm,'' Campbell said,
``we intend to slue the Hubble telescope around so that its metal
back faces the meteoroids, shielding its optics from damage.''


   For 10 hours the telescope will be pointed opposite the
direction from which the meteors will be coming, he said.


   Intelsat will also slue its communications satellites, so that
their big solar panels are turned edgewise to the meteoroid stream
for about three hours, thereby presenting the smallest possible
targets, Ozkul said.


   The Intelsat satellites, which carry digital, voice and
television signals, operate 22,300 miles high in what are known as
geosynchronous orbits, in which each satellite remains permanently
over the same spot on the Earth's surface.


   Chances of serious damage to Mir are regarded as very small,
American experts said, noting that even the space shuttle has been
knicked by debris from time to time with no serious effects. (For
example, the shuttle Atlantis was hit both by a meteoroid fragment
and a piece of debris in September last year.)


   In any case, the big Mir station will not be able to maneuver
out of the way.


   To be on the safe side, the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration has delayed the launching of the space shuttle until
after the Leonid shower.


   Some satellites in low-earth orbits can actually hide from
meteoroid storms, Ozkul said. Some carry enough fuel that they can
maneuver into orbits in which the Earth will shield them for a
short time from the peak of the meteoroid storm.


   ``Hiding from the storm would be a judgment call,'' he said,
``because you would use up a lot of precious maneuvering fuel, but
it can be done in an emergency,'' Ozkul said. ``We couldn't do it
with our geosynchronous satellites, which are 22,300 miles up, but
some near-earth satellites could hide behind the Earth long enough
to reduce the risk.''


   The Aerospace Corp. regards the Leonid shower as a test, from
which the world's satellite owners and users will gain useful
knowledge.


   Some satellites, including the galaxy of Air Force satellites
serving the Global Positioning System of navigation, can detect and
report meteoroid hits on themselves. Such information may lead to
improved meteoroid protection for future space stations, Ailor
said.


   Of the roughly 600 active satellites in orbit, half are
American, and about half of these are military. Only ``a handful''
of these satellites will be reoriented, said Maj. Perry L. Nouis of
the Air Force, spokesman for the United States Space Command. Power
will be temporarily reduced for some satellite systems to lessen
the chance of electrical problems caused by meteoric dust, he said.


   On the positive side, Nouis said, ``This year's Leonid storm
will give us a lot of data that may be useful for protecting
satellites against future showers.''



   Chicken Little would love this one. The Earth is hurtling into
the path of a comet called Temple-Tuttle.


   On Tuesday, the Earth will enter Temple-Tuttle's debris-strewn
backwash and will then, according to many scientists, witness the
most intense meteor shower in more than three decades. The
scientists who track Temple-Tuttle do not even call it a shower,
they call it a meteor storm. (While visible in Asia, the storm will
be obscured by the sun in North America during its peak hours.)


   And in the midst of the storm, among millions of particles
moving at roughly 160,000 miles an hour, will be 600 or so man-made
satellites, which most people in the industrialized world have come
to rely on, wittingly or not, for entertainment, communication and
spying on one another.


   ``This is the first time in the life of our
communications-oriented world that we have faced an environmental
threat of this scope,'' said Ian Rowe, chief executive of Crestech,
a nonprofit group based in Toronto that will track the storm for
the Canadian and U.S. governments.


   Rowe said the only previous instance of a satellite's being
disabled by meteors occurred in 1993 during a shower about
one-3,000th the density of the storm predicted for Tuesday.
American consumers felt the impact of a single satellite's
malfunctioning in May, when the failure of Galaxy IV disrupted
pager service in much of the nation.


   If Tuesday's storm seriously damages any satellites, the effects
could be even more daunting. The spy satellites that are peering
down at Saddam Hussein could lose their ability to spot movements
of his troops. Television channels could become static. Those
relying on satellite navigation could become lost. Corporate
networks could shut down. Even the international telephone system,
which mostly relies on undersea cables, could be crippled. AT&AMP;T
Corp. says there are at least 14 countries, mostly in Eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union, that can be reached by
telephone only by satellite.


   The satellite industry, however, and some of the companies that
rely on it, have a different reaction: no big deal.


   ``We don't think this will be much of an issue,'' said Daniel
Marcus, a spokesman for Panamsat, the world's largest private
satellite company, which is controlled by the Hughes Electronics
unit of General Motors Corp. ``It should be a nonevent.''


   And Stephen Stott, director for satellite engineering at
Intelsat, the international satellite consortium, said, ``Most of
the industry is of the opinion that we do not expect any major
problems.''


   After all, the odds say that the meteors _ known as the Leonids
because they seem to come from the direction of the constellation
Leo _ have about as much chance of seriously damaging the world's
satellites as Mark McGwire does of smashing the windshield of the
sole car in an otherwise empty parking lot with a blast from inside
a Major League ballpark.


   In addition to a physical threat, though, the Leonids, generally
smaller than grains of sand, also pose the risk of creating strong
electrical charges on satellites, potentially damaging sensitive
components.


   So while the big satellite companies play down the threat, they
are still taking steps to protect their property. Deploying a
commercial communications satellite can cost around $250 million.


   The companies plan to turn solar arrays so that their edges face
the oncoming meteors, presenting a smaller target. They plan to
shut down some systems, to keep operations simple.


   But Alastair Hamilton, who is responsible for distributing Cable
News Network as Turner Broadcasting System's senior vice president
for worldwide distribution technology, said some viewers still
might lose their signal for a few minutes Tuesday as satellites
recover from short circuits. He added, however, that he could not
get too agitated because there is so little he can do.


   ``At the end of the day, the satellites are up there and there
is no way to hide them,'' he said. ``So we're going to really see
what happens. And the prevailing opinion is that this is not really
something that we should be losing a huge amount of sleep over.''


   That is not quite how Col. Mike Kelly is handling the situation.
That is because he works for the owner of about a quarter of the
world's satellites: the U.S. government.


   As deputy commander of the 50th Operations Group at Schriever
Air Force Base near Colorado Springs, Colo., Kelly helps run about
60 Air Force satellites worth about $40 billion. Kelly's charges
provide navigation services, communications for officials including
the president, and help in detecting missile launches.


   While Marcus of Panamsat and Gregory Clark, president of Loral
Space Communications, another big private satellite company, said
they expected no impact on their services, Kelly is more
pessimistic.


   ``I think it's very unlikely that we'll lose a spacecraft on the
17th,'' he said. He added, however, ``I think it's probable that
we'll see some electrical problems that we'll have to recover.''


   He said that could take anywhere from a few minutes to several
days. (Kelly's group does not manage any of the optical spy
satellites, he said. Those are generally handled by the
ultra-secretive National Reconnaissance Office, which refused to
comment.)


   In contrast to the private satellite companies, however, the Air
Force, according to Kelly, has decided not to change its normal
operating procedures substantially, except to be especially
watchful.


   ``We don't know ahead of time how serious it will be,'' Kelly
said. ``If it turns out to be a nothingburger, I'll be one of the
happiest people in Colorado.''


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   And Ken Kirkhart will be one of the happiest people in Virginia.
Kirkhart is vice president for production at USA Today, which uses
33 satellite-linked printing plants in the United States. Each
plant is linked to two satellites, Kirkhart said, but he is still
nervous.


   ``It's a crapshoot, you just don't know,'' he said. ``There's
nothing more you can do. There's not time. The only thing you could
do to put yourself in a risk-free situation is to put in a
terrestrial system, and to do that to 33 sites, well, you've dealt
with the phone companies.''


   The New York Times, which uses a satellite to communicate with
eight of its 13 printing plants, has a backup plan to use
terrestrial, or ground-based, communications. But rather than link
directly to all eight sites in the event of a satellite problem,
The Times would link only to some of them and fly film for the
printing plates to the rest, according to Catherine Mathis,
director for investor relations for New York Times Co. She added
that the printing plants could also tune in to a backup satellite.


   Dow Jones &AMP; Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal, was one
of the few companies to disclose the potential problems posed by
the storm in a filing with federal regulators, though a Dow Jones
spokesman refused to discuss his company's contingency plans.


   The Iridium satellite telephone venture, which is controlled by
Motorola Inc., also mentioned the Leonids in a recent federal
filing, though the company declined to discuss the subject.


   ``There is no relevant experience we can use to base an
assessment of the damage, if any, that the storm might cause to
low-earth-orbit satellites,'' the Iridium filing said, referring to
the sort of satellites it uses. ``But such damage could be
significant.''


   But whether the real probability of a satellite's being hit is
one in 5,000, as some industry experts predict, or one in 100, as
Rowe estimates, perhaps the only thing that could provide true
peace of mind would be no meteor storm at all.


   ``In theory, you can walk across a freeway in the middle of the
night and get away with it,'' he said, by way of analogy. ``But you
might get K.O.'d by a truck.''



   Chicken Little would love this one. The Earth is hurtling into
the path of a comet called Temple-Tuttle.


   On Tuesday, the Earth will enter Temple-Tuttle's debris-strewn
backwash and will then, according to many scientists, witness the
most intense meteor shower in more than three decades. The
scientists who track Temple-Tuttle do not even call it a shower,
they call it a meteor storm. (While visible in Asia, the storm will
be obscured by the sun in North America during its peak hours.)


   And in the midst of the storm, among millions of particles
moving at roughly 160,000 miles an hour, will be 600 or so man-made
satellites, which most people in the industrialized world have come
to rely on, wittingly or not, for entertainment, communication and
spying on one another.


   ``This is the first time in the life of our
communications-oriented world that we have faced an environmental
threat of this scope,'' said Ian Rowe, chief executive of Crestech,
a nonprofit group based in Toronto that will track the storm for
the Canadian and U.S. governments.


   Rowe said the only previous instance of a satellite's being
disabled by meteors occurred in 1993 during a shower about
one-3,000th the density of the storm predicted for Tuesday.
American consumers felt the impact of a single satellite's
malfunctioning in May, when the failure of Galaxy IV disrupted
pager service in much of the nation.


   If Tuesday's storm seriously damages any satellites, the effects
could be even more daunting. The spy satellites that are peering
down at Saddam Hussein could lose their ability to spot movements
of his troops. Television channels could become static. Those
relying on satellite navigation could become lost. Corporate
networks could shut down. Even the international telephone system,
which mostly relies on undersea cables, could be crippled. AT&AMP;T
Corp. says there are at least 14 countries, mostly in Eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union, that can be reached by
telephone only by satellite.


   The satellite industry, however, and some of the companies that
rely on it, have a different reaction: no big deal.


   ``We don't think this will be much of an issue,'' said Daniel
Marcus, a spokesman for Panamsat, the world's largest private
satellite company, which is controlled by the Hughes Electronics
unit of General Motors Corp. ``It should be a nonevent.''


   And Stephen Stott, director for satellite engineering at
Intelsat, the international satellite consortium, said, ``Most of
the industry is of the opinion that we do not expect any major
problems.''


   After all, the odds say that the meteors _ known as the Leonids
because they seem to come from the direction of the constellation
Leo _ have about as much chance of seriously damaging the world's
satellites as Mark McGwire does of smashing the windshield of the
sole car in an otherwise empty parking lot with a blast from inside
a Major League ballpark.


   In addition to a physical threat, though, the Leonids, generally
smaller than grains of sand, also pose the risk of creating strong
electrical charges on satellites, potentially damaging sensitive
components.


   So while the big satellite companies play down the threat, they
are still taking steps to protect their property. Deploying a
commercial communications satellite can cost around $250 million.


   The companies plan to turn solar arrays so that their edges face
the oncoming meteors, presenting a smaller target. They plan to
shut down some systems, to keep operations simple.


   But Alastair Hamilton, who is responsible for distributing Cable
News Network as Turner Broadcasting System's senior vice president
for worldwide distribution technology, said some viewers still
might lose their signal for a few minutes Tuesday as satellites
recover from short circuits. He added, however, that he could not
get too agitated because there is so little he can do.


   ``At the end of the day, the satellites are up there and there
is no way to hide them,'' he said. ``So we're going to really see
what happens. And the prevailing opinion is that this is not really
something that we should be losing a huge amount of sleep over.''


   That is not quite how Col. Mike Kelly is handling the situation.
That is because he works for the owner of about a quarter of the
world's satellites: the U.S. government.


   As deputy commander of the 50th Operations Group at Schriever
Air Force Base near Colorado Springs, Colo., Kelly helps run about
60 Air Force satellites worth about $40 billion. Kelly's charges
provide navigation services, communications for officials including
the president, and help in detecting missile launches.


   While Marcus of Panamsat and Gregory Clark, president of Loral
Space Communications, another big private satellite company, said
they expected no impact on their services, Kelly is more
pessimistic.


   ``I think it's very unlikely that we'll lose a spacecraft on the
17th,'' he said. He added, however, ``I think it's probable that
we'll see some electrical problems that we'll have to recover.''


   He said that could take anywhere from a few minutes to several
days. (Kelly's group does not manage any of the optical spy
satellites, he said. Those are generally handled by the
ultra-secretive National Reconnaissance Office, which refused to
comment.)


   In contrast to the private satellite companies, however, the Air
Force, according to Kelly, has decided not to change its normal
operating procedures substantially, except to be especially
watchful.


   ``We don't know ahead of time how serious it will be,'' Kelly
said. ``If it turns out to be a nothingburger, I'll be one of the
happiest people in Colorado.''


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   And Ken Kirkhart will be one of the happiest people in Virginia.
Kirkhart is vice president for production at USA Today, which uses
33 satellite-linked printing plants in the United States. Each
plant is linked to two satellites, Kirkhart said, but he is still
nervous.


   ``It's a crapshoot, you just don't know,'' he said. ``There's
nothing more you can do. There's not time. The only thing you could
do to put yourself in a risk-free situation is to put in a
terrestrial system, and to do that to 33 sites, well, you've dealt
with the phone companies.''


   The New York Times, which uses a satellite to communicate with
eight of its 13 printing plants, has a backup plan to use
terrestrial, or ground-based, communications. But rather than link
directly to all eight sites in the event of a satellite problem,
The Times would link only to some of them and fly film for the
printing plates to the rest, according to Catherine Mathis,
director for investor relations for New York Times Co. She added
that the printing plants could also tune in to a backup satellite.


   Dow Jones &AMP; Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal, was one
of the few companies to disclose the potential problems posed by
the storm in a filing with federal regulators, though a Dow Jones
spokesman refused to discuss his company's contingency plans.


   The Iridium satellite telephone venture, which is controlled by
Motorola Inc., also mentioned the Leonids in a recent federal
filing, though the company declined to discuss the subject.


   ``There is no relevant experience we can use to base an
assessment of the damage, if any, that the storm might cause to
low-earth-orbit satellites,'' the Iridium filing said, referring to
the sort of satellites it uses. ``But such damage could be
significant.''


   But whether the real probability of a satellite's being hit is
one in 5,000, as some industry experts predict, or one in 100, as
Rowe estimates, perhaps the only thing that could provide true
peace of mind would be no meteor storm at all.


   ``In theory, you can walk across a freeway in the middle of the
night and get away with it,'' he said, by way of analogy. ``But you
might get K.O.'d by a truck.''



   By the time the earth collides with a dense swarm of meteoroids
Tuesday night to unleash what may be the heaviest meteor
bombardment since 1966, many orbiting satellites will have
maneuvered into positions facing away from the storm to avoid
damage.


   But scores of instruments on the ground and aboard airplanes
will be aimed right at the blazing trails left by the meteors,
gathering information about these visitors from space and what they
do to the upper atmosphere as they burn up.


   Astrophysicists, atmospheric scientists and others have been
readying their experiments for a year or more in preparation for
Tuesday night's expected Leonid Meteor storm, so named because the
meteors appear to be coming from the direction of the constellation
Leo. The meteors are fragments, most of them microscopic in size,
of Comet 55P/Tempel-Tuttle.


   Although the earth encounters Leonid meteors every year on about
this date, only once in approximately every 33 years does the earth
intersect the swarm at a crowded point in the wake of the comet
after the comet has made its closest approach to the sun.


   This year scientists expect many Leonid meteors to be made of
fresh material knocked loose from the comet, making them better
indicators of the comet's composition than fragments that have
aged.


   In 1966 the Leonids put on a spectacular show, with tens of
thousands of meteors blazing through the sky each hour. Many
astronomers believe there is a good chance that this year's display
will be just as spectacular, at least for viewers in East Asia,
which will be in nighttime darkness during the few hours when the
swarm is at its peak.


   Other experts, including Dr. Donald K. Yeomans of the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., guess that the storm
will be much more modest, producing only 200 to 5,000 meteors per
hour.


   In any case, meteor experts from several countries have
converged on Asia to measure and study the Leonids as they hit the
atmosphere at speeds of about 45 miles per second.


   Among them are teams of specialists who will fly aboard two
airplanes _ a prop-jet Electra owned by the National Center for
Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., and an Air Force KC-135
jet.


   Both are modified with upward-looking windows permitting
photography, spectroscopy, laser probes and other types of
observation.


   For about eight hours starting before midnight in East Asia, the
two airplanes, temporarily based in Okinawa, will fly in formation
with each other. The NCAR Electra, the slower of the two, will fly
back and forth along a straight track at about 25,000 feet, while
the Air Force KC-135, flying at about 40,000 feet, will fly an
elliptical course around the Electra's path.


   Instruments aboard both planes, a known distance apart, will
measure the angles between their respective views of a given meteor
trail, and triangulation will allow them to calculate the altitude
of the trail.


   The scientists are not worried about being hit by meteors, most
of which burn up in the mesosphere far above them, 50 to 65 miles
high. Most of the fragments are smaller than grains of sand, and
only very rarely is a meteor large enough and dense enough to
survive its white-hot trip through the air all the way to the
ground.


   The lead experiment on the Electra, conducted by Dr. Chester S.
Gardner and his team from the University of Illinois, will seek to
measure the amount of iron dumped into the atmosphere by meteors,
and to measure the temperatures of meteor trails.


   &QL; 
nn


   The group has developed a new type of lidar (which stands for
``light detection and ranging'') for the experiment. A lidar
instrument, similar in principle to a radar except that it uses
light instead of radio waves, sends a powerful laser beam directly
upward, where it excites target atoms in the thin atmosphere
sensitive to the laser's wavelength.


   They emit light, and a telescope, aimed at exactly the spot
where atoms excited by the laser are glowing measures and analyzes
the light.


   Gardner's group has built a pair of lidars based on crystals of
alexandrite, a mineral that can lase at any of a range of
wavelengths, depending on how it is ``seeded'' by a small diode
laser of the desired wavelength.


   Using a complex optical system, the University of Illinois group
has tuned its lidars to two of the wavelengths of ionized iron _
the form that iron assumes at very high temperatures. By sending up
beams of ultraviolet light at 372 and 374 nanometers, the group
expects to excite iron ions to fluoresce in visible light that can
be detected and measured by the two telescopes aboard the airplane.


   The ratio of fluorescence triggered by the two laser beams will
reveal the temperature of the high-altitude iron atoms and
therefore the meteor trail. This laser thermometer is expected to
improve understanding of the chemistry of the upper atmosphere and
the effects of meteors on it.


   ``We can't aim the lidars in the plane. They always point
straight up,'' Gardner said in an interview, ``so we have to wait
for a meteor trail to pass directly overhead through out beam. On
an ordinary night we have to wait five hours or more for a single
trail, but during this storm we hope the intervals between overhead
meteors will be much shorter and give us much more information.''


   The National Aeronautics and Space Administration is in charge
of the airborne study, which is also supported by the National
Science Foundation and the Air Force.


   One of the objects of the program is to determine how a meteor's
mass is related to its brightness. In another part of the program,
spectrometers will analyze light from meteor trails (which often
persist for several seconds) in terms of their chemical
composition. Meteoroids are broadly classed either as silicates
(especially olivine, pyroxene and plagioclase) or metallic
meteorites made mostly of iron and nickel, but there are many
variations.


   One of the experiments aboard the Electra is a wide-angle camera
that can record images of the glow emitted by excited sodium atoms
in the atmosphere. The sodium content of the atmosphere is expected
to be significantly increased by the arrival of meteors, and sodium
at high altitude reacts with ozone.


   Scientists hope to learn whether meteor storms degrade the ozone
shield protecting life on earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation.


   Meanwhile, the operators of scores of scientific, military and
commercial satellites have prepared the best they can for the
sand-blasting the meteor storm may produce. Solar panels have been
turned edgewise to present small targets to meteoroids, and some
electrical systems have been shut down to minimize the chances of
destructive short circuits triggered by impacts.


   A satellite regarded as particularly endangered by the Leonids
is the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE) designed and built by
the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory to study
charged particles coming from the sun and beyond the solar system.


   Launched last year, ACE is now one million miles from the earth
in the direction of the sun _ a very vulnerable position close to
the center of the comet's wake. NASA is reorienting the spacecraft
to present a small target, but Dr. Mary Chiu, ACE's program
manager, said ``we're crossing our fingers in hopes of an
uneventful day on the 17th.''



   The much-anticipated storm of Leonid meteors swept over Earth on
Tuesday, a bit ahead of schedule, leaving many sky watchers
disappointed but others dazzled by fireballs as bright as the full
moon.


   The Leonids, so named because they appear to come from the
constellation Leo, flash through the sky in large numbers every
year about this date, but once in about every 33 years the swarm is
often so dense that tens or hundreds of meteors are seen each hour.


   The last such storm was in 1966, and a good show was expected
this year. Another good Leonid display might occur a year from now,
astronomers have forecast.


   The Leonid meteors, most of them smaller than grains of sand,
are fragments knocked loose from Comet 55P/Temple-Tuttle each time
it makes a close approach to the Sun every 33 years.


   Reports from regions that were in nighttime darkness Tuesday
during the peak of the meteor storm suggested wide variations in
the storm's apparent intensity. But nowhere did the reported rate
of meteor sightings greatly exceed 2,000 per hour _ barely
one-tenth the rate at which meteors hit the atmosphere during the
great 1966 Leonid storm.


   There were no immediate reports of damage to any of the roughly
600 satellites orbiting the Earth that are used for communications,
military surveillance, climate and weather monitoring, astronomy
and navigation. The odds of any given satellite being hit by a
meteoroid were calculated as about one in a thousand _ a small risk
but one that caused some concern because of the high value of many
satellites. Satellite experts said that some damage might take days
to detect, but that satellites generally seemed to have escaped
disabling harm.


   Forecasts that the Leonids would put on their best show over
Japan and China were only partly realized; according to news agency
reports, people in parts of Thailand saw many bright meteor trails,
while the view from Tokyo was disappointing.


   The meteor display was unexpectedly good over southern Europe,
and came several hours earlier than predicted.


   The Harvard-Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge,
Mass., which is a worldwide clearinghouse for reports from
astronomers, said that observers at La Palma in the Canary Islands
saw about 2,000 meteors per hour at the peak. But observers in
Portugal counted only a few more than 300 per hour.


   Dr. Brian Marsden of the astrophysical observatory said the
Leonid display included an unusually high proportion of fireballs,
a few of which reached the brightness of the full moon during their
speedy crossing of the sky.


   Russia's Interfax news agency reported that a meteorite weighing
several ounces was seen to land during the Leonid storm in front of
a car in the city of Rustavi in Georgia.


   But Marsden expressed doubt that the meteorite was part of the
storm. ``We sometimes see sporadic meteorites during these storms
that are not related to the main body of meteoroids,'' he said.
``This sounds like one.''


   Only very rarely is a meteoroid large enough and dense enough to
survive its fiery trip through the atmosphere and reach the ground.
Old records suggest, however, that as many as half a dozen people
(and one dog) may have been killed by meteors during the course of
human history. But there is ample geological evidence that huge
meteoroids have hit the Earth in the distant past, and probably
will again.



   NATIONAL FORECAST &QL;


   Low pressure will move northeast over the northern Great Lakes
Thursday. A conveyor belt of cold, moist air to the northwest of
the low's track will cause moderate to heavy snow over northern
Minnesota to persist into the afternoon. An additional few inches
of snow will accumulate after sunrise, bringing storm totals to
nearly a foot in some places. Patchy light snow and flurries will
linger over the eastern Dakotas and the rest of Minnesota.


   A cold front extending south from the low will cross the Ohio
and middle Mississippi valleys. Scattered showers and isolated
thunderstorms will precede the front. Given that moist air from the
Gulf of Mexico is limited, heavy rain is unlikely and rainfall
totals will generally remain below one half inch.


   Milder air surging north ahead of the front will encounter
stubborn chilly air in the northern Appalachians. As the warm air
is forced to rise above the cooler air near the ground, clouds and
pockets of drizzle will develop over the Northeastern states, aided
by damp air penetrating inland from the Atlantic. Showers will
develop Thursday night as the front approaches.


   Although a rogue shower is possible, most of the Southeast will
remain dry through Thursday evening. Florida will be partly sunny
and very warm, with near record warmth in southern sections.


   A stream of mild, moist air from the Pacific Ocean will direct
an area of rain onto the Northwest coast with snow falling in the
Cascades. Meanwhile, high pressure over the Great Basin will
sponsor sunny, tranquil conditions from the central Rockies to
southern California.


   Focus: Eye Protection


   For three hours on Tuesday, no images were received from the
satellite that normally provides constant coverage for most of
North America and the Atlantic. Technicians had repositioned the
mirror that is used to make images of the earth so that the
fusillade of tiny particles from the Leonid meteor shower would be
less likely to damage the eye in the sky. There are five
geostationary satellites spaced approximately 70 degrees of
longitude apart that are essential tools for monitoring global
weather changes. All of these satellites came through Tuesday's
meteor shower unscathed.

