
	   RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) _ Brazilian stocks dropped sharply
Monday in the lowest trading volume of the year despite the almost
certain re-election of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso.
	   Brazil's largest stock exchange, Sao Paulo Bovespa, lost 4.5
percent while the smaller Rio de Janeiro stock exchange fell 3.4
percent.
	   Although Cardoso seems to have clinched a first-round win,
investors feared that he would put off any announcement of the
harsh economic measures deemed necessary until the second round of
voting for a number of governors, senators and federal deputies
takes place on Oct. 25.
	   ``Cardoso has won in the first round, but the market is thinking
that all the measures we are waiting for will only take place after
the second round,'' said Fabio Lara, director at Schahin Cury
brokerage in Sao Paulo.
	   Lara said that the Cardoso government doesn't want to announce
anything detrimental _ such as tax increases _ to its allied
candidates in the state governments until they are through the
second round of voting.

	   SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) _ Attention has shifted in Brazil from
the president's almost-certain re-election to gubernatorial runoff
elections, on which the success of belt tightening measures deemed
necessary to avert an economic meltdown may hinge.
	   With 69.5 percent of the votes counted Tuesday, President
Fernando Henrique Cardoso Cardoso continued to lead with 52.4
percent of the vote. His closest rival, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva
of the leftist Workers Party had 32.6 percent, and Ciro Gomes of
the Popular Socialist Party had 11 percent.
	   Nine other candidates shared the rest. Cardoso must win more
than half the vote from Sunday's election to avoid a second-round
runoff _ a feat he is expected to easily accomplish.
	   The same rule applies to the gubernatorial candidates in all 27
states, and at least 14 of them appeared headed to a second round
of voting on Oct.25.
	   ``Governors have always exerted enormous influence on their
states' congressional bloc,'' said Luciano Dias a Brasilia-based
political consultant. ``And the outcome of the runoff elections
will definitely determine just how easy, or difficult, it will be
for Cardoso to persuade Congress to approve the austerity
measures.''
	   He said that if Cardoso opponents win runoff elections in the
states of Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Minas Gerais and Rio Grande do
Sul, ``the going will get tough.''
	   Together, those four states occupy 200 of the 513 seats in the
Chamber of Deputies and account for 67.29 percent of the country's
gross domestic product.
	   ``If the opposition wins in these states Cardoso will face a
formidable wall of resistance against the unpopular measures that
are certain to come,'' Dias said. ``The president will get his
measures, but he will have to negotiate, and that means bartering,
which could weaken the austerity package.''
	   Brazil, like other emerging markets, is suffering from a loss of
investor confidence and a strong outflow of capital. The country's
foreign reserves have fallen below dlrs 50 billion from the dlrs 70
billion posted at the end of July.
	   To prevent a collapse of the real and stem capital flight,
interest rates were hiked to 50 percent a year. Cardoso has
promised to tackle the country's ballooning a budget deficit _
equal to 7.3 percent of gross domestic product _ and hinted that
taxes would be increased.
	   Although most observers agree that the faster these measures are
defined and introduced, the better, Cardoso is unlikely to impose
them until after the second round of voting. To do so would
jeopardize the chances of pro-government gubernatorial candidates.
	   Chip Brown, chief Latin American economist for Salomon Smith
Barney in New York, said that little news was expected over the
next few weeks on the fiscal package meant to restore confidence
among investors.
	   ``I hope the market doesn't expect too much immediately,'' he
said, adding that the best markets can hope for in the short term
is broad sketches of a fiscal plan.
	   Ricardo Ribeiro, a Sao Paulo political consultant, said delaying
the measures could make their approval more difficult.
	   ``As the population gets a better notion of the seriousness of
the crisis and the severity of the measures that will certainly be
adopted, Cardoso's popularity will erode,'' he said. ``And if his
popularity drops, so will his chances to get Congress' approval for
these measures.''

	   RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) _ With President Fernando Henrique
Cardoso's economic austerity plan at a critical point for Brazil,
voters went to the polls Sunday to elect governors in 12 states and
the Federal District of Brasilia.
	   Voting was calm after polls opened at 8 a.m. (1000 GMT), showing
little of the illegal but last-minute campaigning that pervaded the
first-round election on Oct. 4. Even so, army troops were deployed
at voting stations in four northern states to ensure peace.
	   The austerity plan was very much on the minds of the 64 million
Brazilians expected to vote. Paulo Garrini, a business
administration student in Sao Paulo, said it was one reason he
voted for incumbent Gov. Mario Covas, a Cardoso ally.
	   ``Covas made it clear he will support Cardoso in the austerity
measures the country needs, no matter how painful they may be,''
Garrini said.
	   But many voters are indifferent, believing that hard times are
ahead _ no matter what their choice at the polls.
	   Caught up in the financial turmoil that began more than a year
ago in Southeast Asia, Brazil believes it needs to slash government
spending and raise taxes quickly to shore up its flagging economy
and restore investor confidence.
	   The difficulty, however, of pushing through such unpopular
measures at election time became evident when Cardoso repeatedly
put off announcing the austerity package. Such measures were
initially expected after first-round elections, in which Cardoso
was re-elected and 14 state governors were chosen.
	   After the election, Cardoso said the package could be announced
by Oct. 20. But with 13 government-allied candidates facing tough
run-offs, he postponed it until after the Oct. 25 second-round
elections.
	   David Fleischer, a professor of political science at the
University of Brasilia said it was a smart move on the president's
part.
	   ``Governors have far more power and a direct hold on their
states than the president has over the whole country,'' said
Fleischer. ``Their influence and political weight should not be
underestimated.''
	   Another reason Cardoso needs allies at the state level is to
curb their overspending, which accounts for a big chunk of the
government's dlrs 65 billion budget deficit.
	   Even without announcing harsh budget cutting measures, the
situation still looks fairly grim for Cardoso allies in Brazil's
four most developed states _ Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Minas
Gerais and Rio Grande do Sul.
	   In Sao Paulo, Brazil's industrial and financial powerhouse with
more than 34 million inhabitants, Covas came from behind in the
polls to pass Paulo Maluf, a populist candidate with a taste for
extravagant public works projects.
	   In Rio de Janeiro, polls put opposition candidate Anthony
Garotinho well ahead of Cardoso ally Cesar Maia.
	   ``Whoever wins, it's going to be difficult because it doesn't
look like there's going to be much money to spend,'' said Paulo
Benevides, a 22-year-old college student. He said he planned to
vote for Maia, Rio's mayor.

	   RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) _ This time around, the presidential
Rolls Royce is staying in the garage. And forget about champagne,
the inauguration will be toasted with locally-grown sparkling wine
and contraband whiskey seized by customs officials.
	   President Fernando Henrique Cardoso prepares to be sworn in to a
second term in office Friday, but for many here the expectations
are as stripped down as the commemorations.
	   ``The difference in sentiment between the first term and the
second term are enormous,'' said Antonio Delfim Neto, a congressman
and former finance minister, ``In 1995 everything was certainty and
hope ... the beginning of the second term is sadder: everything is
uncertainty.''
	   On the eve of his 1995 inauguration, Cardoso enjoyed approval
ratings of around 70 percent, almost entirely on the strength of
the economic plan he devised as finance minister under
then-President Itamar Franco.
	   Introduced in July 1994, the plan dropped inflation, then
hovering around 50 percent a month, to a single digit almost
overnight.
	   Suddenly one US dollar bought only 82 centavos of a real _ the
local currency _ and for many Brazilians, beaten down by years of
triple digit inflation, it was a heady time.
	   With new hard currency in their wallets, Brazilians traveled
abroad in record numbers and consumption of electronics and other
goods grew so quickly there were concerns the economy was
overheating.
	   It was in this climate that Cardoso was overwhelming elected in
Oct. 1995 and fittingly all the stops were pulled out for his first
inauguration with some 6,000 people attending the 3 million real
(dlrs 2.5 million) gala.
	   The economic plan received high marks from most economists, but
many warned that it would at best provide a window of opportunity
in which to address deep-seated structural problems.
	   Cardoso's government proposed constitutional amendments to
change the tax system, the pension system and civil service
payrolls and shore-up the country's burgeoning deficit.
	   But aside from a constitutional amendment that allowed the
president and governors to stand for reelection, something
prohibited under the country's 1988 Constitution, the other reforms
languished in Congress.
	   For a while, that wasn't a problem.
	   Trade and public sector deficits continue to grow, but foreign
money was flooding into Brazil faster than ever and the country's
reserves swelled from around dlrs 40 billion to above dlrs 70
billion during Cardoso's first three and a half years in office.
	   The volume on Brazilian stock exchanges more than doubled and
leading stock funds boasted returns of over 200 percent a year.
	   But when financial instability rocked Asia and then Russia last
August, the same foreign investment that had swelled the country's
foreign reserves left even faster than it came in.
	   With a dlrs 41.5 International Monetary Fund-led bailout
package, Brazil may have avoided becoming the latest domino to fall
in the financial crisis afflicting Asia and Russia, but the outcome
of all the fiscal belt-tightening needed to qualify for that aid
will almost certainly spell recession in 1999.
	   Although Cardoso soundly defeated his opponent, leftist Worker's
Party candidate Luiz Lula Inacio da Silva, in the first round of
last year's October election, his approval rating has sunk by some
17 percentage points in the months since then to around 35 percent.
	   According to a recent poll by the Datafolha organization, 48
percent of those questioned now expect inflation to rise over the
coming months and 66 percent are worried about losing their jobs.
	   The poll which interviewed 11,851 people had a margin of error
of plus or minus two percentage points.
	   Not surprisingly, Friday's inauguration dinner will be a
scaled-down affair.
	   Only 114 people are expected to attend the dinner following
Friday's inauguration which is expected to cost 60,000 reals (dlrs
50,000), or a mere 2 percent of what the first one cost.
	   Whether Cardoso will be able to steer Brazil _ and an unruly
Congress _ away from these uncertain shores is anybody's guess, but
regardless of what Brazilians think of the job he's doing they're
sticking by their captain.
	   ``He got us into this mess, so we'll just have to hope he can
get us out,'' said Luis Fernando Duarte de Morares, an agricultural
engineer.


   RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil _ Brazilian voters appeared to re-elect
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso in the first round of balloting
Sunday, thus maintaining the leadership of a country struggling
against economic crisis.


   In preliminary returns, Cardoso appeared to have defeated Luiz
Inacio Lula da Silva, the three-time presidential candidate of the
leftist Workers Party, with 56 percent of the vote, a far stronger
showing than polls initially predicted.


   Cabinet members gathering at the presidential palace in Brasilia
Sunday night called the vote a mandate for reform, which the
president is under national and international pressure to carry
out.


   With $30 billion having drained from federal reserves since
Russia's economic collapse in late August, and the Sao Paulo stock
market down more than 40 percent this year, the Brazilian
government has been somewhat paralyzed by the approach of
elections. It has been negotiating a bailout with the International
Monetary Fund, but has been unable to show progress on structural
reforms that would cut government expenses over the long term.


   But the waiting is probably not over yet. The size of his
victory strengthens Cardoso's hand for the politically sensitive
social security, civil service and tax overhauls ahead. But,
political analysts said, Congress will probably not convene to
consider painful economic reforms before important gubernatorial
runoffs on Oct. 25.


   With policy-makers at the meetings of the Group of Seven top
industrialized nations and the International Monetary Fund in
Washington seeking permanent solutions to ward off the volatility
that is threatening Brazil after devastating Asia and Russia,
Cardoso is expected to start taking steps to put Brazil's accounts
in order.


   Antonio Carlos Alkimin, a political science professor at
Catholic University and chief of population studies at the
Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics, said he did not
expect that Cardoso could make progress toward restructuring the
government before Oct. 25, because these measures would require
legislative approval.


   ``What he can do is take measures on the administrative level to
cut costs, or to play with controls on currency,'' Alkimin said.


   But Gregg Smith, chief investment strategist at Prudential
Securities, said that financial markets were not expecting concrete
reforms from Brazil in the next few weeks.


   ``The next thing everybody's going to be watching is whether
there is an IMF and World Bank package to support Brazil and
whether the Brazilians are starting to take actions to work on the
budget deficit,'' he said. ``If those two things look like they're
moving in the right direction, it will begin to calm financial
markets.''


   Sunday's balloting was somewhat confused, with about half the
country voting on small shoebox-sized computers that elderly voters
had trouble mastering. Though electioneering was required to end
before polls opened, most candidates appeared to ignore the
prohibition.


   At Rocinha, in Rio de Janeiro, believed to be the largest slum
in South America with about 300,000 residents, palm-sized photos of
candidates fluttered like autumn leaves through the air and
carpeted the streets. People waited more than an hour to cast their
votes, with many supporting Cardoso for re-election.


   Luiz Claudio Silveira, a 34-year-old horse trainer, said he
planned to vote for Cardoso, largely because he ended inflation.
``If you go to the supermarket, you can buy whatever you need
now,'' he said. ``Four years is not enough to change a country as
big as ours. I really believe in him.''


   Rute Vicente Oliveira, a 48-year-old manicurist, also planned to
vote for Cardoso. She said that for most of her life, her family
lived in a lean-to, too poor to build a proper home. It was her
father's dream, she said, and he died before it was realized.
``Now, the house is almost done, it's almost completely in order,''
she said.


   Gilberto Manuel da Silva, 40, who owns an ice cream parlor, said
that he expected the economic adjustments that Cardoso announced
would hurt him personally, but he was prepared to sacrifice in
order to stabilize Brazil's economy.


   ``I'm thinking more about the situation of the country,'' da
Silva said. ``With a stable money, our situation will get better.''



   RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil _ Brazilian voters gave President
Fernando Henrique Cardoso a comfortable lead in the first round of
balloting Sunday, apparently maintaining the leadership of a
country struggling against economic crisis.


   With 22 percent of the vote counted, Cardoso appeared to have
won 51 percent of the vote, compared with 34 percent for his main
rival, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, the three-time presidential
candidate of the leftist Workers Party.


   If he still has a majority when returns are complete, Cardoso
will be declared re-elected without facing a runoff. Exit polls
indicated that he might win as much as 56 percent.


   Cabinet members gathering at the presidential palace in Brasilia
Sunday night called the vote a mandate for the economic measures
that the president is under national and international pressure to
carry out.


   With $30 billion having drained from federal reserves since
Russia's economic collapse in late August, and with the Sao Paulo
stock market down more than 40 percent this year, the Brazilian
government has been close to paralyzed by the approach of the
election.


   It has been negotiating a bailout with the International
Monetary Fund but has been unable to show progress on structural
changes that would cut government expenses over the long term.


   The waiting is probably not over yet, though. The size of his
victory strengthens Cardoso's hand for the politically sensitive
social security, civil service and tax overhauls ahead. But
political analysts said Congress would probably not convene to
consider the painful economic measures before important
gubernatorial runoffs on Oct. 25 because the legislators will be
busy campaigning for their parties' gubernatorial candidates.


   With policy-makers at meetings of the Group of Seven industrial
nations and the International Monetary Fund in Washington seeking
permanent solutions to ward off the volatility that is threatening
Brazil after devastating Asia and Russia, Cardoso is under
considerable pressure to put Brazil's accounts in order.


   But Gregg Smith, chief investment strategist at Prudential
Securities in New York, said the international financial markets
were not necessarily expecting major changes from Brazil in the
next few weeks.


   ``The next thing everybody's going to be watching is whether
there is an IMF and World Bank package to support Brazil, and
whether the Brazilians are starting to take actions to work on the
budget deficit,'' he said. ``If those two things look like they're
moving in the right direction, it will begin to calm financial
markets.''


   Antonio Carlos Alkimin, a political science professor at
Catholic University in Rio de Janeiro and chief of population
studies at the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics,
said he did not expect that Cardoso could make progress toward
restructuring the government before Oct. 25, because such measures
would require legislative approval.


   ``What he can do is take measures on the administrative level to
cut costs or to play with controls on currency,'' Alkimin said.


   Sunday's balloting was somewhat confused, with about half of the
country voting on small shoebox-sized computers that elderly voters
had trouble mastering. Though electioneering was required to end
before polls opened Sunday, most candidates appeared to ignore the
prohibition.


   At Rocinha, in Rio de Janeiro, believed to be the largest slum
in South America with about 300,000 residents, palm-size photos of
candidates fluttered like autumn leaves through the air and
carpeted the streets. People waited more than an hour to cast their
votes, with many supporting Cardoso.


   Luiz Claudio Silveira, 34, a horse trainer who voted in Rocinha,
said he planned to vote for Cardoso, largely because the president
had ended inflation. ``If you go to the supermarket, you can buy
whatever you need now,'' Silveira said. ``Four years is not enough
to change a country as big as ours. I really believe in him.''


   Rute Vicente Oliveira, 48, a manicurist, also planned to vote
for Cardoso. For most of her life, she said, her family lived in a
lean-to, too poor to build a proper home. Her father dreamed of
giving his family solid, sturdy shelter, Ms. Oliveira said, but he
died before concrete blocks replaced the family's plywood slats.


   ``Now the house is almost done,'' she said. ``It's almost
completely in order.''


   Many voters appeared to be unaware of the fiscal adjustments
ahead, though the president announced less than two weeks before
the election that government belt-tightening measures would be
inevitable. Of the 106 million Brazilians eligible to vote Sunday,
nearly 70 percent have less than an elementary school education,
and 35 percent are barely literate.


   Gilberto Manuel da Silva, 40, who owns an ice cream parlor, said
that he expected the economic adjustments to hurt him personally
but that he was prepared to sacrifice to stabilize Brazil's
economy. The president said he would cut government costs, crack
down on tax evaders and, if necessary, raise taxes to increase
revenues.


   ``I'm thinking more about the situation of the country than of
myself,'' da Silva said. ``With a stable money, our situation will
get better.''



   RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil _ Through the anxious weeks leading up to
the national elections here on Sunday, as some $30 billion fled
Brazil despite the doubling of domestic interest rates,
international financial officials watched for the government to
tackle cost-cutting reforms as soon as voting ended.


   But Monday, as official returns indicated President Fernando
Henrique Cardoso was barely squeaking through to re-election and
governors allied to him were locked in runoffs later this month,
the road to reform is looming longer and more complex. Polling
groups and television stations that reported an overwhelming
victory for Cardoso came under severe criticism.


   Though exit polls reported Cardoso taking some 56 percent of the
vote, official tallies Monday afternoon gave him 51 percent, with
56 percent of the votes counted. His nearest rival, Luiz Inacio
Lula da Silva, of the leftist Workers Party, took 34 percent,
substantially higher than the 24 percent polls predicted he would
take. Cardoso's margin was just 1.2 percent higher than needed to
avoid a second round of balloting.


   Ciro Gomes, an up-and-coming former finance minister from the
northeastern state of Ceara, took 11 percent, while Eneas Carneiro,
a nationalist who called for Brazil to build an atom bomb, gained
2.2 percent of the vote. Though voting in Brazil is largely
obligatory, the share of abstentions and invalid votes reached 30
percent.


   Allies of the president did poorly in many of Brazil's most
populous and politically influential states, weakening Cardoso's
hand going into negotiations for reform.


   Though Brazil has not yet submitted a formal request, Brazilian
officials have been in Washington negotiating some form of
assistance from the International Monetary Fund that will likely
total $30 billion or more.


   The country's failure to cut spending in two key areas _ social
security and civil service _ and to simplify and improve tax
collection, makes Brazil heavily dependent on foreign capital at a
time when investors generally are fleeing emerging markets.


   Brazil's budget deficit is exceeding 7 percent of Gross National
Product, and its current account deficit, which includes its
balance of trade as well as debt service and other payments,
constitutes more than 4 percent of GNP. Government cutbacks of $5
billion, and the doubling of interbank loan rates to almost 50
percent, have slowed but not stopped the flight of capital. As of 6
p.m. Monday, some $300 million had left foreign reserve coffers,
and the Sao Paulo stock market was down 4.47 percent.


   Investors appear to be watching for lasting reforms from the
government and for signs that wealthy nations will back Brazil.


   But the political arena remained strangely silent Monday, almost
suspended. By Monday afternoon, Cardoso still had not claimed
victory, and da Silva had not conceded defeat. Sergio Amaral, the
president's spokesman, said Cardoso would wait until official
results were completely tallied before speaking.


   Newspapers in Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo headlined exit polls
showing the president doing vastly better than official tallies
bore out, and in state races, polling institutes by and large
underplayed the strength of leftist candidates, bringing them under
sharp attack.


   ``The nation has watched the most shameful political and
electoral manipulation heard of in recent history,'' said a
statement from the coalition of parties that da Silva represented.
It accused the polling institutes, media, and electoral officials
of conspiring ``to influence public opinion and alter the electoral
will.''


   Mauro Francisco Paulino, director of opinion polls for
Datafolha, one of the main polling services, denied any intentional
manipulation of the results. He predicted the final results would
support the exit polls. While it is illegal to announce exit poll
results while voting is still going on, it is ``traditional'' in
Brazil, he said.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   Brazil's Congress, out campaigning for gubernatorial candidates,
will likely not convene to consider reforms before the end of the
month, however dire the international situation. Cardoso appears to
be planning for a low profile in the coming weeks, with a brief
vacation and a trip to Portugal coming up. He is not expected to
openly campaign for any candidates.


   Maria Dalvo Kinzo, a political scientist at the University of
Sao Paulo, said the only factor that might make pushing reforms
easier for the president this time is the urgency of the crisis.
``There's a consciousness that the crisis is very serious,'' Ms.
Kinzo said.


   But she warned that with the strong showings of leftist
candidates in important state races, and with half the deputies
newcomers to Congress, the president's governing coalition was
appearing more fragmented. ``Now, he's going to have to really
patch together support,'' she said.


   Jose Augusto Guilhermo de Albuquerque, coordinator of the
research center on international relations at the University of Sao
Paulo, agreed. ``His coalition will be larger and less
ideologically committed than the current one,'' Albuquerque said.
Party discipline, customarily half-hearted, will be even weaker in
the new panorama, he added.



   The New York Times said in editorial for Wednesday, Oct. 7:


   Brazilian President Fernando Henrique Cardoso has little time to
savor his apparent first-round re-election victory Sunday. He must
take rapid and unpopular steps to save the economy.


   Brazilians voted for Cardoso because they trusted his economic
management more than that of his main rival, Luiz Inacio Lula da
Silva. da Silva, who leads the Workers Party, campaigned for a more
closed economy. His prescriptions struck many Brazilians as
well-meaning but unrealistic. But Cardoso avoided a runoff by the
smallest of margins, and his allies failed to win in many important
states. The new Congress, which will take office in February, is
likely to be less cooperative than the current one.


   Brazil has made great economic strides under policies initiated
by Cardoso, first as finance minister and then as president.
Inflation, a perennial problem, has fallen from 3,000 percent a
year to around zero. As the economy has grown, many Brazilians have
prospered.


   Much of that success came from a policy of tying the Brazilian
currency, the real, to the dollar, and allowing it to fall about 7
percent a year. Unfortunately, it appears that the depreciation
rate was not enough to keep up with economic realities. Brazil has
been running a large trade deficit as well as a big budget deficit.
Now, with markets fearful, its debts have become crucial. More than
$300 million a day is draining out of the country despite interest
rates of 40 percent, which have stopped economic growth.


   Cardoso and the Congress must take fiscal discipline seriously.
In May the Congress rejected his social security and civil service
reforms. Then he abandoned restraints during his election campaign,
and spending soared. Now Congress must simplify taxes and improve
income tax collection rates _ especially crucial because these
taxes will come from the better-off in a country with one of the
world's most unequal income distributions.


   Brazil must also control spending, especially on pensions for
the bloated public sector. Putting Brazil's finances in order will
be painful, but not as painful as economic collapse.


   The International Monetary Fund should calm investors by coming
up with a bailout to stem the hemorrhage of Brazil's reserves. But
it must be contingent on Brazil's own reforms. It is unlikely,
however, that the international community can find enough money to
support the overvalued real forever. The real will probably
eventually have to be devalued, but it is understandable that
Brazilians, who remember hyperinflation, fear an immediate and
perhaps uncontrolled devaluation.


   The perception now is that Latin America could go the way of
Asia if Brazil sinks, and such perceptions can create their own
problems. There are good reasons for the world to help Brazil, but
Brazil must also deal with its own problems.



   RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil _ Rivals of President Fernando Henrique
Cardoso won important victories in gubernatorial races Sunday,
handing the recently re-elected president a complex landscape for
pushing through long-delayed government and economic reforms.


   In Sao Paulo, however, Brazil's most populous and wealthiest
state, Mario Covas appeared likely to win re-election as governor,
defeating former Sao Paulo mayor Paulo Maluf.


   Although Maluf's party forms part of the president's governing
coalition, Cardoso had endorsed Covas. Maluf is known as a big
spender with presidential ambitions of his own. His victory could
have complicated Cardoso's efforts to control state spending and
win congressional approval for reforms.


   Despite considerable foreign pressure on Brazil to demonstrate
how it will restructure government to reduce deficits, Cardoso has
put off publicly announcing his plans, fearing they could damage
the chances of his allies in the elections. The delay costs Brazil
heavily; each day, the country loses hundreds of billions of
dollars in foreign reserves, and the longer the country maintains
interest rates over 40 percent, the deeper its recession and debt.


   With Brazil's solvency seen as crucial to maintaining economic
stability of Latin America and protecting the United States from
recession, the United States and the International Monetary Fund
are preparing to chip in toward an aid package of at least $30
billion to shore up Brazil.


   Cardoso won re-election on the first round of national voting
earlier this month, but partial results showed left-of-center
candidates leading in some of the most developed states of Brazil.


   Sen. Pedro Piva, of the president's Brazilian Social Democracy
Party, called Sunday's elections ``a warning sign for the
government,'' adding, ``I think we're going to have difficulties
ahead to approve this package.''


   The governors are important both because they control a
considerable share of the national budget and act as natural
leaders of their parties in Congress. States will be called upon to
cut their budgets by as much as 20 to 30 percent, which will mean
laying off civil servants. Current laws allow the states to fire
workers if the payroll exceeds 60 percent of the state budget;
under a new law the administration is proposing, layoffs would
become mandatory once that ceiling was reached.


   In Rio de Janeiro, Anthony Garotinho, a former mayor of the city
of Campos who belongs to the leftist Democratic Workers Party, was
leading over Cesar Maia, a former Rio mayor belonging to a
conservative grouping.


   In Rio Grande do Sul in the south, Olivio Dutra of the Workers'
Party was also leading over the incumbent, Antonio Britto, a
Cardoso ally.


   In Minas Gerais, former President Itamar Franco was leading by a
wide margin over the incumbent Eduardo Azeredo, also of Cardoso's
centrist Brazilian Social Democracy Party. Franco's party belongs
to the governing coalition, but Franco has been critical of
Cardoso's economic policies and personally stung by the president's
re-election.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   In 1993, during Franco's presidency, he named Cardoso finance
minister and launched the economic plan that would make Cardoso a
national hero to a people weary of hyperinflation. But Franco was
deeply humiliated at his party's convention earlier this year, when
he sought to run for president against Cardoso. He was not only
turned down, but laughed at.


   Sunday night, Sen. Maguito Vilela, of Franco's Brazilian
Democratic Movement Party, said backing for Cardoso's reforms would
not be automatic. The party would not support tax increases, he
said, noting that one tax slated for increase, on financial
transfers, was initially approved as a temporary measure to finance
hospitals, but ended up going to offset the deficit. ``It just
burdened people and didn't do anything to improve health care,'' he
said.


   Asked on Brazilian television precisely which measures his party
would endorse, Vilela said, ``If it means more sacrifice for the
people,'' his party ``will not support it.''



   RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil _ The Brazilian government, which
recently pledged to slash discretionary spending by $7 billion in
an urgent attempt to boost its economic credibility, has released
new budget figures that show the true reduction will run about half
the promised amount.


   Total spending would actually increase next year.


   The original spending cuts, announced two weeks ago, were part
of an anxiously awaited program to raise government revenues next
year by $23.5 billion, and represented Brazil's commitment to
fiscal house cleaning and to shrinking its dangerously high budget
deficit.


   The package was crucial for Brazil to qualify for a backup loan
from the International Monetary Fund and other sources, including
the U.S. government, and to counter a $30 billion hemorrhage from
Brazil's foreign reserves, which have fallen to about $42 billion.


   The Clinton administration is concerned that a default in Brazil
_ the world's ninth-largest economy and home to more than half of
South America's 300 million people _ could trigger repercussions
around Latin America, the destination of some 20 percent of U.S.
exports.


   With the IMF aid package expected to be announced within days,
the revised 1999 budget sent to Congress on Monday suggests that
Brazil may have overstated the level of actual government savings,
and it raised questions about the true size of the government's
effort.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   Planning Minister Paulo Paiva and Martus Tavares, the
government's executive secretary, could not be reached for comment.


   David Fleischer, a professor at the Federal University of
Brasilia and president of the Brazilian chapter of Transparency
International, said the spending cuts were designed to restore
confidence abroad with a show of discipline that is partly
illusion. ``Maybe about half the savings is real,'' Fleischer said.
``The other half is pre-packed fat. They stuffed it all in the
budget in late August.''


   The figure of $7 billion in budget cuts is not entirely without
foundation. But it is based on savings from a generous 1999 budget
that, from the moment it was released in August, was acknowledged
to be unrealistically optimistic.


   The budget projected 4 percent economic expansion for 1999, just
after Brazil had doubled the ceiling on interest rates to almost 50
percent, to counter a $1 billion a day flight of dollar reserves
from the country after the Russian collapse.


   Soon after it was released, the government conceded that the
economy, instead of growing, would shrink by 1 percent next year,
and some independent economists predict a more severe recession,
noting that high interest rates are choking off the supply of
capital for private industry.


   Compared to this year's spending, the government's budget for
next year shows some $3.8 billion in actual savings on
discretionary expenses, with the budget dropping to $29.8 billion.
The original budget for next year projected $36.4 billion on
discretionary expenses, which include a range of programs,
including land purchases for agrarian reform and to extend basic
sanitation.


   But the Brazilian government's overall budget, because of
court-ordered increases in salaries and benefits, will increase
$1.9 billion next year, to $154.2 billion, despite its claims to
austerity.


   Though some economists, like Paulo Rabello de Castro, of the
Rio-based Atlantic Institute, say they are confident that Brazil is
on the road to righting itself, they appear discouraged by its
current response to the crisis. Even before this week's details
appeared, economists criticized the Government for relying heavily
on taxes increases and pension dues to raise more than half the
promised revenues.


   The government of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso is already
fighting skepticism abroad, after he announced another austerity
package a year ago, only to drop it as elections neared.


   ''When you're in a situation like Brazil is in, you usually have
to do more than enough to win back confidence,'' Castro said.
``What came out of 1999 budget was slightly less than enough.''


   Alexandre Barros, a political scientist and consultant in
Brasilia, said he believed the big question surrounding Brazil was
not so much the size of the cuts made now, but the government's
ability to sustain lean spending practices over time.


   ''What I want to see is down the road,'' Barros said. ``What
happens after three or six months as the immediate pressures
recede, and people say, `Okay, Mr. President, why don't you revoke
this or that austerity measure?'''

