
	   BEIJING (AP) _ China hopes to win its first Asian Games gold
medal in the martial art of taekwondo next month in Thailand, the
official newspaper China Sports Daily said Tuesday.
	   The team of six women and three men will be China's first to
compete in taekwondo at the Asian Games, the report said.
	   China only began developing taekwondo in 1995, a year after the
last Asian Games, the newspaper said.
	   China picked up one silver and one bronze medal at the 1997
world championships and won a gold, silver and five bronze medals
at the Asian championships this year, the report said.
	   With South Korea, Taiwan and Iran _ the strongest taekwondo
nations _ all competing in the upcoming games, ``the Chinese team's
goal is to go all out to win one gold medal,'' it said.
	   Head coach Chen Liren was quoted as saying that a recent
decision by the sport's international federation to adjust weight
categories for competitions would affect China's women. The team
would not be dominant at any weight, he said.
	   ``Strong competitors at the Asian Games will be as numerous as
trees in a forest,'' Chen was quoted as saying.
	   Meanwhile, world record holder Wu Yanyan has been swimming an
average 11 kilometers (7 miles) a day at a camp in southwest China
where she is in training for the games, the official Xinhua News
Agency said.
	   But the 20-year-old Wu, who shattered the 200-meter individual
medley record at China's national games in October 1997, said it
would be difficult for her to reach her peak at the Asian Games
because she has recently had stamina problems, Xinhua added.	   

	   BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) _ Thailand expects 39 countries, regions
or organizations to send teams to the Asian Games, but is still
waiting for confirmation from Tajikistan, Mongolia and a
Palestinian team, the games' organizers said Monday.
	   Only Afghanistan is certain not to participate, said a press
release from the organizing committee of the Dec. 6-20 games in
Bangkok.
	   The lists submitted by participants so far show 8,804 athletes
and officials planning to come to the games, the statement said,
adding that the eventual number is expected to be 10,000.
	   It said the Olympic Council of Asia, the region's governing
sports body, had been in close contact with Tajikistan, Mongolia
and the Palestinians.
	   ``We will wait for their final reply until Nov. 20,'' it quoted
Warawut Sumon, head of Thailand's technical committee, as saying.
``At the same time, we are taking into consideration that some
teams may not make it to the regional games.''
	   Last week, Afghanistan said it would not send a team to the
games because it could not afford the expense. It added that its
sports minister and a second representative might show up to carry
the flag as a ceremonial gesture.
	   The organizers also said Monday that the Olympic Council of Asia
and the International Olympic Committee are both withholding
recognition of Afghanistan's national organizing committee for the
games because two separate parties claim to represent it.
	   All programs, participation and budgetary allocations for
Afghanistan's committee have been frozen, it quoted Abdul Muttaleb
Ahmad, OCA director general, as saying.
	   Thailand's King Bhumibol Adulyadej, meanwhile, received Thai
athletes and organizers Monday at his palace, and wished them good
luck and success.
	   ``Even though the country has faced financial trouble, Thailand
has shown the watching world that the crisis cannot be an obstacle
if there is sincerity and harmony among Thais to make this major
event happen,'' he added.	   

	   SEOUL, South Korea (AP) _ Despite catastrophic hunger at home,
North Korea plans to send 317 athletes and officials to next
month's Asian Games in Thailand, South Korean officials said
Thursday.
	   It will be the largest sports delegation the communist country
has sent abroad in recent years.
	   North Korean Sports Minister Chang Ung said 209 athletes from
his country will compete in 21 events in Bangkok, hoping to win
medals in women's judo, women's soccer, wrestling, table tennis,
weightlifting and boxing.
	   Chang made the remarks in an interview published recently by the
Chosun Shinbo, a newspaper run by pro-North Korean residents in
Japan, said Seoul's Naewoe Press, which obtained the report.
	   Chang said North Korea was sending a large delegation to Bangkok
to prepare for the 2000 Sydney Olympics.
	   North Korea did not enter the last Asian Games, in Hiroshima,
Japan, in 1994. It sent only 18 athletes and officials to the
Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan, in February.
	   Naewoe is run by South Korea's main government intelligence
agency and specializes in monitoring communist news media.
	   Three years of floods and drought that started in 1995
devastated North Korea's collective farming and planned economy,
forcing the country to rely on outside aid to feed its 23 million
people.	   

	   BEIJING (AP) _ Chinese swimmers, missing some of their stars,
are eyeing Japan as the team to beat at the Asian Games in
Thailand, an official report said Wednesday.
	   China's formidable table tennis team, also missing some veteran
champions, is bracing for a challenge, too, and aiming for just
four to five gold medals at the games next month, another report
said.
	   Chen Yan and Wu Yanyan, world record holders in the women's
400-meter and 200-meter individual medleys, respectively, are
leading hopefuls in the pool, the China Daily said.
	   Other hopefuls are Shan Ying in the women's 50- and 100-meter
freestyle and new team member Chen Hua in the women's 800- and
1,500-meter freestyle, the newspaper said. Han Xue, a breaststroke
short-course world record holder, also has medal chances, it added.
	   But world record holders Le Jingyi and He Cihong will miss the
games, the newspaper said. Top butterfly swimmer Liu Limin also has
left to study in the United States, it said.
	   ``We excel in freestyle and relay events, but we are weaker in
backstroke and butterfly than Japan,'' the newspaper quoted Zhang
Xiong, the national team's head coach, as saying.
	   ``The competition this time will be hard because two-thirds of
our swimmers are new,'' Zhang said. ``We won't let any hope of
winning slip through our hands although it appears Japan may
dominate.''
	   In the men's events, China is aiming to win five of 14 swimming
titles, the newspaper said.
	   The table tennis team, meanwhile, will be doing without veteran
players Deng Yaping, Ma Wenge and Wang Tao, the China Youth Daily
said.
	   ``This indicates that the Chinese table tennis team has already
completed the handover from old to new,'' the newspaper said. Head
coach Cai Zhenhua said the team was aiming for just four to five
golds, the newspaper said.
	   To prepare for the games, the team went to northern Hebei
province outside Beijing for three weeks of training starting Nov.
8, the newspaper added.
	   Meanwhile, China's gymnastics team is aiming for 8 to 10 of the
14 gold medals at stake, the China Sports Daily said.
	   China, the overall gold medal leader at the past three games,
will send 596 athletes to Thailand and compete in 32 of the 36
sports. Sports officials have said China hopes to win more than 100
golds.
	   China won 137 _ or 41 percent _ of 337 gold medals at stake at
the last games in Hiroshima, Japan, in 1994.	   

	   BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) _ Star striker Chen Yang scored a hat
trick Wednesday for China in a lackluster 4-1 victory over
Cambodia, securing his country a spot in the second soccer round
for the 13th Asian Games.
	   Underdog Turkmenistan also earned a second-round berth by
overcoming a 2-0 half-time deficit to defeat South Korea in a
nail-biting finish, with two goals coming in the final 10 minutes.
	   The United Arab Emirates and North Korea ended regulation play
and extra time at 3-3, settling their Group E match in the southern
city of Songkhla with a penalty shootout. The Emirates won, 7-4.
	   Playing at the National Stadium on a poor pitch with traces of
day-old repairs visible, host Thailand made a fiery debut against
Hong Kong, shutting out their opponents 5-0 after leading 3-0 at
the half.
	   Thailand's Kritsada Piandit scored the first goal barely a
minute into the match, followed by teammates Worawood Srimaka on a
penalty in the eighth minute and Kiatisuk Senamuang in the 22nd
minute.
	   Eight minutes into the second half, Tawan Sripan kicked in
Thailand's fourth goal, and Kiatisuk hit the target for the second
time at the 40th minute to make the final score 5-0.
	   The result takes Hong Kong out of competition, since they also
lost their Group F opener to Oman on Monday.
	   China fulfilled expectations of topping Group B in Surat Thani
with the victory over Cambodia, the 4-1 scoreline mirroring
Monday's rout of Lebanon. But though the Chinese dominated, they
failed to sparkle.
	   Chen scored early in the first half, heading in a long pass from
midfield. Peng Wang caught a pass on the right side about 10
minutes later and fired his second Asian Games goal.
	   Chen scored again on a near shot and headed in his third goal in
the 38th minute.
	   Cambodia partially salvaged its honor late in the second half
when Hok Sochetra beat the complacent Chinese defense and scored.
It was one of the only shots on goal that the Cambodians had.
	   Following Monday's victory over regional favorite Vietnam,
Turkmenistan staged its second upset in Group A in the central city
of Nakhon Sawan, eclipsing South Korea.
	   The South Koreans carved up the Turkmenistan defense in the
first half. Yong-Soo Choi gave his team _ which hoped to erase
memories of a dismal World Cup _ a commanding two-goal advantage
with an opening-minute goal and a shot that pin-balled off a
teammate into the net in the 44th minute.
	   Turkmenistan regrouped after the half. A long cross found the
head of Igor Kislov to put Turkmenistan on the scoreboard. Steady
pressure led to a dangerous foul and red card for South Korea's
Byoung-Keun Lee.
	   Muslim Agaev took advantage of the reduced South Korean side
with a slicing left-footed shot into the top far corner to
equalize. Kislov fired home the winner in the dying minutes. 	   

	   BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) _ Once at the top of world field hockey,
India would like to have a hockey god to help regain that glory.
	   ``Things are changing in Bangkok, and we are feeling much
better,'' Rajinder Singh, manager of the Indian hockey squad, said
Friday, a day after the Indians defeated Japan 3-2 in a warmup
match for the Asian Games.
	   The Indians, who number 980 million, have an amazing quality of
discovering gods who number in hundreds of thousands. There is even
a goddess for small pox and Indians still pray to her to keep that
disease, almost eradicated, away.
	   ``We believe in divine blessings and we hope it pours on us,''
said Singh.
	   There are so many ifs for the Indians on the way to a gold medal
in the 12-nation tournament that it may well be luck besides skill
and endurance needed to reach the top.
	   In its glory days, skill helped India win a total of eight
Olympic gold medals, the most recently in 1980. But the Indians
have won an Asian Games gold medal only once, silver eight times
and bronze once.
	   The South Koreans, who have remained a force in field hockey
since winning the gold in the 1986 Asian Games at home, are clearly
the favorite.
	   Between winning the last Asian Games gold in Hiroshima in 1994,
the Koreans have figured in two World Cups, two Champions Trophy
events and the Atlanta Olympics.
	   The Indians were silver medalists at Hiroshima, but since then
have suffered a downward swing. They placed eighth at the 1996
Olympics and one step lower in the Utrecht World Cup. At this
year's Commonwealth Games, India was out of the medals.
	   In Bangkok, however, there are some silver linings.
	   Skipper Dhanraj Pillay is a passionate player and no defense is
safe against him if he gets the ball properly. Baljit Singh
Dhillon, a specialist in flick-drives in goal-winning penalty
corners, has shaped up well.
	   Pakistan, India's traditional rival in the subcontinent on many
issues besides sports, can also dampen the Indian hope for a
comeback. Pakistan has won the Asian Games gold medal seven times,
silver twice and bronze once.
	   The other medalists at the Asians Games have been Malaysia with
five bronzes and Japan with two.
 &UR; (dg)	   

	   BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) _ China's swim team will hit the water at
the Asian Games on Monday with a reminder of the darkest chapter in
its story of drug shame.
	   Xiong Gouming, one of the 11 Chinese athletes who tested
positive for steroids in Hiroshima four years ago, will compete in
the men's 400-meter individual medley, taking his place on a team
that is constantly forced to defend itself.
	   Head coach Zhang Xiong said Xiong Gouming ``feels fine'' about
being back at an Asian Games. ``That was the past,'' said Zhang,
brushing off drug questions Sunday. ``We hope that we will be
clean.''
	   The Chinese Olympic Committee tested athletes before their
departure for Bangkok, and Chinese media said the swimmers were
subjected to four surprise tests conducted by world governing body
FINA.
	   ``We treat this as a major issue to make sure no Chinese
athletes will test positive,'' COC vice president Li Furong said.
	   Earlier this year China announced, through FINA, that any of its
athletes testing positive for steroids would be banned for life.
Under those criteria, Xiong would never have had his second chance
at an Asian Games.
	   Xiong won four golds in Hiroshima but has been mediocre since
returning to international competition at the East Asian Games a
year ago. He was one of many poor performers at the world
championships in Perth in January, as the Chinese appeared
demoralized by yet another scandal.
	   After female swimmer Yuan Yuan was caught trying to smuggle 13
vials of human growth hormone through Sydney Airport, four of her
teammates were nabbed with masking agents in their systems and
thrown out of the games.
	   Chinese women swimmers won 12 of the 16 golds at stake in the
1994 Rome world championships and all 15 of their races in the 1994
Asian Games.
	   The team won three gold medals at this year's world
championships. Two of those went in the medley events to world
record holders Chen Yan and Wu Yanyan, who will lead the Chinese
team here.
	   Fellow world record holders Le Jingyi and He Cihong were left
off a generally young squad assembled with a view ahead to the 2000
Olympics.
	   Japan's rising talent will test the inexperienced Chinese after
a successful world championships.
	   Mai Nakamura, a silver medalist in the 100-meter backstroke and
bronze medalist over 200; Ayari Aoyama, silver medalist in the
100-meter butterfly, and Yasuko Tajima, bronze medalist in the
400-meter medley, give the Japanese team undoubted class.
 &UR; (tjh)	   

	   BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) _ China's swim team will hit the water at
the Asian Games on Monday with a reminder of the darkest chapter in
its story of drug shame.
	   Xiong Guoming, one of the 11 Chinese athletes who tested
positive for steroids in Hiroshima four years ago, will compete in
the men's 400-meter individual medley, taking his place on a team
that is constantly forced to defend itself.
	   Head coach Zhang Xiong said Xiong Guoming ``feels fine'' about
being back at an Asian Games. ``That was the past,'' said Zhang,
brushing off drug questions Sunday. ``We hope that we will be
clean.''
	   The Chinese Olympic Committee tested athletes before their
departure for Bangkok, and Chinese media said the swimmers were
subjected to four surprise tests conducted by world governing body
FINA.
	   ``We treat this as a major issue to make sure no Chinese
athletes will test positive,'' COC vice president Li Furong said.
	   Earlier this year China announced, through FINA, that any of its
athletes testing positive for steroids would be banned for life.
Under those criteria, Xiong would never have had his second chance
at an Asian Games.
	   Xiong won four golds in Hiroshima but has been mediocre since
returning to international competition at the East Asian Games a
year ago. He was one of many poor performers at the world
championships in Perth in January, as the Chinese appeared
demoralized by yet another scandal.
	   After female swimmer Yuan Yuan was caught trying to smuggle 13
vials of human growth hormone through Sydney Airport, four of her
teammates were nabbed with masking agents in their systems and
thrown out of the games.
	   Chinese women swimmers won 12 of the 16 golds at stake in the
1994 Rome world championships and all 15 of their races in the 1994
Asian Games.
	   The team won three gold medals at this year's world
championships. Two of those went in the medley events to world
record holders Chen Yan and Wu Yanyan, who will lead the Chinese
team here.
	   Fellow world record holders Le Jingyi and He Cihong were left
off a generally young squad assembled with a view ahead to the 2000
Olympics.
	   Japan's rising talent will test the inexperienced Chinese after
a successful world championships.
	   Mai Nakamura, a silver medalist in the 100-meter backstroke and
bronze medalist over 200; Ayari Aoyama, silver medalist in the
100-meter butterfly, and Yasuko Tajima, bronze medalist in the
400-meter medley, give the Japanese team undoubted class.
 &UR; (tjh)

	   BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) _ China's women divers expect to clinch
Asian Games gold in the platform competition but could face stiff
competition from Kazakstan in the springboard.
	   ``If we make no big mistake, the gold should be ours,'' Chinese
platform diver Li Na said Sunday, on the eve of the start to the
diving competition.
	   The diminutive 14-year-old, competing in her first major
international competition, told China's state-run Xinhua News
Agency that she sees her 16-year-old teammate Cai Yuyan as her main
opponent in the platform.
	   But she acknowledged that Kazakstan's Irina Vyguzova could
challenge China in the women's three-meter springboard, Xinhua
said.
	   ``Irina is an excellent diver,'' said Li. ``If she gives her
best in the competition, she has the chance to snatch the gold away
from Chinese divers.''
	   Guo Jingjing and Yang Lan will represent China in the women's
springboard contest.
 &UR; jl	   

	   BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) _ China's women divers expect to clinch
Asian Games gold in the platform competition but could face stiff
competition from Kazakstan in the springboard.
	   ``If we make no big mistake, the gold should be ours,'' Chinese
platform diver Li Na said Sunday, on the eve of the start to the
diving competition.
	   The diminutive 14-year-old, competing in her first major
international competition, told China's state-run Xinhua News
Agency that she sees her 16-year-old teammate Cai Yuyan as her main
opponent in the platform.
	   But she acknowledged that Kazakstan's Irina Vyguzova could
challenge China in the women's three-meter springboard, Xinhua
said.
	   ``Irina is an excellent diver,'' said Li. ``If she gives her
best in the competition, she has the chance to snatch the gold away
from Chinese divers.''
	   Guo Jingjing and Yang Lan will represent China in the women's
springboard contest.
 &UR; jl	   
