
	   ANKARA, Turkey (AP) _ Foreign Minister Ismail Cem said Wednesday
Turkey was remaining cautious towards neighboring Syria despite a
deal with Damascus to crack down on a Kurdish rebel group.
	   Turkey and Syria stuck the deal Tuesday, ending a weeks-long
standoff. Under the deal, Syria agreed to brand the Kurdish Workers
Party, or PKK, a ``terrorist'' group and to clamp down its activity
in Syria.
	   ``These results are very important,'' Cem told a group of
businessmen.''But we have to be careful about their applications.
We shall be observing developments with caution.''
	   Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz said rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan
had left Syria for Russia, which would be a sign Damascus was
meeting Turkish demands. Sabah newspaper he was hiding in
Odintsovo, 30 kilometers (18 miles) west of Moscow. Russian
officials, however, said they had no information on Ocalan entering
Russia.
	   Ocalan's PKK has been fighting for autonomy in Turkey since 1984
in a war that has claimed 37,000 lives.
	   (sf-cph)

	   MOSCOW (AP) _ Russia's parliament on Wednesday asked President
Boris Yeltsin to offer political asylum to Kurdish rebel leader
Abdullah Ocalan, who is wanted in Turkey on charges of heading a
terrorist organization.
	   Turkey officially asked Russia last week to extradite Ocalan,
who leads the banned Kurdish Workers Party, or PKK, which has been
fighting for Kurdish autonomy in Turkey since 1984. The conflict
has killed an estimated 37,000 people.
	   Communist lawmaker Yuri Nikiforenko initiated the move seeking
asylum for Ocalan.
	   ``This man has done a lot for the Kurdish people,'' he said.
	   The State Duma, parliament's lower house, supported
Nikiforenko's proposal by a unanimous vote.
	   Russia's Foreign Ministry last month condemned the Turkish
government's raids against Kurdish rebels in Iraq and demanded that
Turkey withdraw its troops.
	   Ocalan's whereabouts are unclear. Turkey says he recently left
Syria for Russia, but Russian officials have refused to confirm
that he is in the country.
	   Turkish newspapers have said Ocalan was in hiding in a suburb 30
kilometers (18 miles) west of Moscow.
	   Ocalan issued a statement last month saying he was somewhere in
the Kurdish regions that stretch over parts of Turkey, Iraq, Iran
and Syria.
	   (vi/gm) 	   

	   MOSCOW (AP) _ Russia's parliament on Wednesday asked President
Boris Yeltsin to offer political asylum to Kurdish rebel leader
Abdullah Ocalan, who is wanted in Turkey on charges of heading a
terrorist organization.
	   Turkey officially asked Russia last week to extradite Ocalan,
who leads the banned Kurdish Workers Party, or PKK, which has been
fighting for Kurdish autonomy in Turkey since 1984. The conflict
has killed an estimated 37,000 people.
	   Communist lawmaker Yuri Nikiforenko initiated the move seeking
asylum after Ocalan wrote the State Duma, parliament's lower house,
thanking it for supporting his cause. Ocalan had officially
requested asylum, Interfax reported.
	   ``This man has done a lot for the Kurdish people,'' Nikiforenko
said.
	   The Duma supported Nikiforenko's proposal by a unanimous vote.
	   Russia's Foreign Ministry last month condemned the Turkish
government's raids against Kurdish rebels in Iraq and demanded that
Turkey withdraw its troops.
	   In his letter to the Duma, Ocalan accused the Turkish government
of trying ``to annihilate the leadership of the Kurdish Workers
Party, drown in blood the national liberation struggle by the
Kurdish people and thus pave the way for their control of the
entire Middle East.''
	   Turkish Deputy Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit criticized the Duma
vote, and said he hoped President Boris Yeltsin would `take on a
realistic and constructive approach.''
	   ``Instead of forging ties with a terrorist organization like the
PKK, (Russia) should keep good relations with a country like
Turkey,'' Ecevit told reporters in Ankara, the Turkish capital.
	   Ocalan's whereabouts are unclear. Turkey says he recently left
Syria for Russia, but Russian officials have refused to confirm
that he is in the country.
	   Turkish newspapers have said Ocalan was in hiding in a suburb 30
kilometers (18 miles) west of Moscow.
	   Ocalan issued a statement last month saying he was somewhere in
the Kurdish regions that stretch over parts of Turkey, Iraq, Iran
and Syria.
	   (vi/gm/ml)

	   ANKARA, Turkey (AP) _ The foreign ministry on Friday protested
the invitation by 109 Greek deputies to a Kurdish rebel leader to
visit Greece.
	   In a statement, the ministry said that the invitation ``would
only encourage terrorist activities.''
	   ``We strongly protest the action of the Greek parliamentarians
and await the Greek government decision to clarify its position
toward this invitation,'' the statement read.
	   The open invitation to Abdullah Ocalan, leader of the outlawed
Kurdistan Worker's Party, was issued Thursday.
	   Turkey has in the past accused Greece of harboring and training
Kurdish rebels who have been fighting for autonomy in Turkey's
southeast since 1984. Close to 37,000 people have died in the
conflict.
	   Greece denies the charges, though the group's political wing has
an office in Athens.
	   Turkey and Greece are at odds over numerous issues, including
the division of Cyprus and territorial disputes in the Aegean.
	   Turkish officials claim that Ocalan is currently hiding in
Russia.
	   (ht-fd)

	   YEREVAN, Armenia (AP) _ Seven female members of a Kurdish group
were on a three-day hunger strike Tuesday in support of a
controversial Kurdish leader, whom they claim is being persecuted.
	   The women, who began their protest Monday at the Freedom for the
Women of Kurdistan building in the Armenian capital, were dancing,
singing and watching Kurdish television on Tuesday.
	   The walls in the room were adorned with portraits of Abdullah
Ocalan, who leads the banned Kurdistan Workers Party, or PKK. The
group has been fighting for Kurdish autonomy in Turkey since 1984.
	   ``Fighting against imperialism, fascism and the colonial policy
of Turkey, we are approaching the victory in the cause of
liberation of our people,'' the women said in a statement.
	   Kurds elsewhere were also demonstrating in support of Ocalan,
said the PKK leader in Armenia Mraz Khumoyan. Ocalan has been
labeled a terrorist by Turkey and the United States.
	   Turkish leaders say Ocalan is currently hiding in Russia, but
Russian officials have refused to confirm that he is in the
country.
	   Last week, Russia's parliament passed an appeal asking President
Boris Yeltsin to offer political asylum to Ocalan. Officials say
Yeltsin is unlikely to heed parliament's appeal.
	   (str/nw/gm) 	   

	   ROME (AP) _ Abdullah Ocalan, leader of Kurdish insurgents who
has been sought for years by Turkey, has been detained in Rome
after stepping off a plane from Moscow, Turkish and Italian
officials said Friday.
	   Necati Bilican, Turkey's police chief, said his country would do
whatever necessary to extradite the rebel leader.
	   Ocalan leads the outlawed Kurdistan Workers Party, PKK, which
has been fighting for autonomy in southeastern Turkey since 1984.
Nearly 37,000 people have died in the conflict. Turkey considers
the group a terrorist organization.
	   Italian officials said Ocalan was picked up on arrival Thursday
night at Leonardo da Vinci airport in Rome.
	   Ocalan is wanted under an international arrest warrant,
according to Turkish authorities.
	   He is on trial in Turkey in absentia on charges of leading a
terrorist organization, threatening the country's territorial
integrity and ordering killings, charges than can bring the death
penalty.
	   Germany also issued an arrest warrant in January 1990 that
accuses Ocalan of ordering the killing of PKK deserters and being
the head of a terrorist organization.
	   Turkey's Anatolia news agency said its envoy in Rome was making
an immediate extradition request, but it could run into
difficulties. Although there have been no executions in Turkey
since 1984, Italy has consistently refused to extradite anyone if
there was even a risk of capital punishment.
	   Luca Cosson, an official of Rome police, said that Ocalan flew
to Rome from Moscow and was carrying a false passport. They then
made further checks and discovered his identity, Cosson said.
	   Claiming he was not feeling well, Ocalan asked to be taken to a
hospital, the Italian official said.
	   It was unclear why Ocalan would travel to Italy, which is not
known to be a hub for Turkish Kurdish rebels. However, the
so-called Kurdish Parliament in exile was recently invited by
Italian deputies to hold a session in the capital.
	   A Kurdish news agency said he would ask for political asylum in
Italy.
	   Ocalan, was reportedly forced to leave his hideout in Damascus
following Turkey's threats to strike Syria. Ankara claims Syria has
long supported the rebels, offering them arms and refuge.
	   According to Turkish officials, Ocalan had fled to Russia and
sought political asylum from Moscow.
	   Of Marxist inspiration, the PKK was founded by Ocalan, a
political science dropout from Ankara university in 1978. Ocalan
turned the group toward armed struggle in 1984.
	   The Turkish army claims it all but wiped out the PKK within
Turkey, but the rebels have hideouts in Iran, Syria, and Iraq and
the fighting continues.
	   (ht-sf-vls) 	   

	   ROME (AP) _ The leader of a 14-year-old Kurdish insurgency,
considered a terrorist by Turkey and its most-wanted criminal, has
been arrested in Rome, setting up a major battle with Italy over
his extradition.
	   Abdullah Ocalan was arrested after stepping off a plane from
Moscow, where he had sought asylum after recently fleeing his
hideout in Syria, Turkish and Italian officials said Friday.
	   Ocalan leads the outlawed Kurdistan Workers Party, PKK, which
has been fighting for autonomy in southeastern Turkey since 1984.
Nearly 37,000 people have died in the conflict.
	   Italian officials said Ocalan was picked up on arrival Thursday
night at Leonardo da Vinci airport in Rome because of an
outstanding Turkish warrant.
	   ``Once identified, the Italian government had the obligation to
go ahead with his arrest given the serious charges against him,''
said Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini.
	   Ocalan is on trial in absentia in Turkey on charges of leading a
terrorist organization, threatening the country's territorial
integrity and ordering killings, charges than can bring the death
penalty.
	   Germany also issued an arrest warrant in January 1990 that
accuses Ocalan of ordering the killing of PKK deserters and being
the head of a terrorist organization.
	   Although there have been no executions in Turkey since 1984,
Italy has consistently refused to extradite anyone if there was
even a risk of capital punishment.
	   Luca Cosson, an official of Rome police, said that Ocalan flew
to Rome from Moscow and was carrying a false passport. Further
checks revealed his identity, Cosson said.
	   Ocalan was held in a Rome prison, pending a hearing on Turkey's
request for extradition. No hearing date was immediately set.
Earlier reports said he was being treated in a hospital after
complaining of feeling unwell.
	   In Turkey, Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz, who has been on the
political ropes in a corruption scandal, hailed the arrest as
evidence the government's crackdown on the rebels was succeeding.
	   ``As a result of the pressure we have applied on Syria, our
struggle against terrorism has reached a very positive stage,''
Yilmaz said. He said he asked through Italy's ambassador to Ankara
for Ocalan's extradition and that Turkey's envoy in Rome made the
same request.
	   ``As our NATO ally we do not believe that Italy would make the
wrong decision,'' Yilmaz said.
	   It was unclear why Ocalan would travel to Italy, which is not
known to be a hub for Turkish Kurdish rebels. However, the
so-called Kurdish Parliament in exile was recently invited by
Italian deputies to hold a session in the capital.
	   A Kurdish news agency said he would ask for political asylum in
Italy, a call also taken up by leftist politicians in the Italian
parliament, who asked their government to grant it.
	   Ocalan was reportedly forced to leave his hideout in Damascus
following Turkey's threats to strike Syria. Ankara claims Syria has
long supported the rebels, offering them arms and refuge.
	   Of Marxist inspiration, the PKK was founded by Ocalan, a
political science dropout from Ankara university in 1978. Ocalan
turned the group toward armed struggle in 1984, finding fertile
ground among poor Kurds in the underdeveloped southeast.
	   The Turkish army claims it all but wiped out the PKK within
Turkey, but the rebels have hideouts in Iran, Syria, and Iraq and
the fighting continues.
	   (ht-sf-fd)

	   ROME (AP) _ The leader of a 14-year-old Kurdish insurgency,
considered a terrorist by Turkey and its most-wanted criminal, has
been arrested in Rome, setting up a major battle with Italy over
his extradition.
	   Abdullah Ocalan was arrested after stepping off a plane from
Moscow, where he had sought asylum after recently fleeing his
hideout in Syria, Turkish and Italian officials said Friday.
	   Ocalan leads the outlawed Kurdistan Workers Party, PKK, which
has been fighting for autonomy in southeastern Turkey since 1984.
Nearly 37,000 people have died in the conflict.
	   Italian officials said Ocalan was picked up on arrival Thursday
night at Leonardo da Vinci airport in Rome because of an
outstanding Turkish warrant.
	   ``Once identified, the Italian government had the obligation to
go ahead with his arrest given the serious charges against him,''
said Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini.
	   Ocalan is on trial in absentia in Turkey on charges of leading a
terrorist organization, threatening the country's territorial
integrity and ordering killings, charges than can bring the death
penalty.
	   Germany also issued an arrest warrant in January 1990 that
accuses Ocalan of ordering the killing of PKK deserters and being
the head of a terrorist organization.
	   Although there have been no executions in Turkey since 1984,
Italy has consistently refused to extradite anyone if there was
even a risk of capital punishment.
	   Luca Cosson, an official of Rome police, said that Ocalan flew
to Rome from Moscow and was carrying a false passport. Further
checks revealed his identity, Cosson said.
	   Ocalan was held in a Rome prison, pending a hearing on Turkey's
request for extradition. No hearing date was immediately set.
Earlier reports said he was being treated in a hospital after
complaining of feeling unwell.
	   In Turkey, Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz, who has been on the
political ropes in a corruption scandal, hailed the arrest as
evidence the government's crackdown on the rebels was succeeding.
	   ``As a result of the pressure we have applied on Syria, our
struggle against terrorism has reached a very positive stage,''
Yilmaz said. He said he asked through Italy's ambassador to Ankara
for Ocalan's extradition and that Turkey's envoy in Rome made the
same request.
	   ``As our NATO ally we do not believe that Italy would make the
wrong decision,'' Yilmaz said.
	   It was unclear why Ocalan would travel to Italy, which is not
known to be a hub for Turkish Kurdish rebels. However, the
so-called Kurdish Parliament in exile was recently invited by
Italian deputies to hold a session in the capital.
	   A Kurdish news agency said he would ask for political asylum in
Italy, a call also taken up by leftist politicians in the Italian
parliament, who asked their government to grant it.
	   Ocalan was reportedly forced to leave his hideout in Damascus
following Turkey's threats to strike Syria. Ankara claims Syria has
long supported the rebels, offering them arms and refuge.
	   Of Marxist inspiration, the PKK was founded by Ocalan, a
political science dropout from Ankara university in 1978. Ocalan
turned the group toward armed struggle in 1984, finding fertile
ground among poor Kurds in the underdeveloped southeast.
	   The Turkish army claims it all but wiped out the PKK within
Turkey, but the rebels have hideouts in Iran, Syria, and Iraq and
the fighting continues.
	   (ht-sf-fd)

	   NICOSIA, Cyprus (AP) - About 100 Kurds began a hunger strike in
the main square of Nicosia on Saturday to protest the detention in
Italy of Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan.
	   Men and women wearing white shrouds danced to Kurdish music
blared through loudspeakers beneath the Venetian walls of the old
city. Several hundred Kurdish refugees have fled their homeland for
this Mediterranean island nations.
	   Red and gold flags of the outlawed Kurdish Workers Party of
Turkey, known as the PKK, fluttered over huge cloth banners with
slogans in English and Greek calling for Ocalan's release.
	   Ocalan is the leader of the PKK which has been waging an
rebellion in southeast Turkey for the past 14 years in a demand for
autonomy. Turkey has branded him a terrorist, holding him
responsible for nearly 37,000 deaths in the conflict.
	   Italy announced that Ocalan was arrested on arrival at Rome's
airport Thursday on the basis of an outstanding Turkish warrant.
	   The protesters distributed pamphlets by the National Liberation
Front of Kurdistan, the PKK's political wing. These quoted Ocalan
as saying he flew to Rome with the knowledge of the Italian
government.
	   He was further quoted as saying that ``necessary procedures are
under way so that I can remain in this country (Italy) in my
political capacity. But it is too early to say anything positive or
negative on developments.
	   ``I call on our people, our friends and the entire international
community to watch developments closely.''
 &UR; ae-ggl


   ISTANBUL, Turkey _ A three-week-old crisis between Turkey and
Syria appears to have been at least temporarily defused by the
signing of an agreement in which Syria agreed to stop supporting
Kurdish rebels, who are demanding a homeland in Turkey.


   Turkey had demanded that Syria cease all support for the
guerrilla force known as the Kurdistan Workers Party, or PKK, which
is fighting for a Kurdish homeland in southeastern Turkey. It also
demanded that Syria expel the guerrillas' leader, Abdullah Ocalan.


   According to a text made public by Turkish officials, the
agreement stipulates that Syria ``will not allow the PKK to receive
military, logistic or financial support or to carry out propaganda
on its soil.''


   Ocalan's current whereabouts are unclear. He asserted in a
telephone interview with journalists last week that he is ``in
Kurdistan,'' which could mean either southeastern Turkey or
northern Iraq. Other reports place him in Russia, Cyprus, Iran or
Armenia. Some say he remains in Damascus.


   ``He has been in a Moscow suburb for a week,'' Prime Minister
Mesut Yilmaz of Turkey said on Tuesday. ``We have taken serious
initiatives for his extradition.''


   The Russian ambassador in Turkey, Alexander Lebedev, denied that
Ocalan was in Russia.


   Turkey set off the crisis this month by threatening to take
military action against Syria if it did not stop supporting Kurdish
rebels. Officials from the two countries met on Monday and Tuesday
in southeastern Turkey.


   The agreement has not yet been officially announced in Syria,
but Turkish officials said that it had been signed by a senior
Syrian officer, Gen. Adnan Badr al-Hassan, and that they assumed it
represented Syria's official position.


   ``This document should be considered as an agreement which ends
the crisis and starts dialogue,'' said Necati Uktan, a spokesman
for the Turkish Foreign Ministry.


   ``Syria extends its hand of friendship to us,'' Uktan said. ``If
everything is realized on the framework of the agreement, we will
then shake this hand. If we consider the worst scenario and think
that this will not be realized, our military measures will be
enforced at this stage.''


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   The two countries were brought together in part through the
efforts of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.


   ``We are pleased that we helped defuse the crisis between the
two countries,'' Egyptian Foreign Minister Amr Moussa said in Cairo
Wednesday. ``All we care about is that both sides reach a
settlement, which could certainly spare the region lots of
tension.''


   Turkish officials had insisted that talks with Syria cover only
the question of support for Kurdish insurgents. They said they
would not discuss Syria's grievances against Turkey, which include
water issues and the status of Hatay Province, which is part of
Turkey but claimed by Syria. On Tuesday a Syrian television station
broadcast a commentary asserting that Hatay ``is an integral part
of Syria and cannot be surrendered.''


   Foreign diplomats in Turkey who monitor developments in the
Middle East said they would reserve judgment on the accord
announced Wednesday.


   ``The Syrians have always said that they don't support the PKK
and that Ocalan is not there,'' a diplomat said. ``So what they've
promised doesn't really change much officially.''


   ``The proof is in the pudding,'' said the diplomat, who spoke on
the condition of anonymity. ``Let's see how the Turks manage to
pull off verification. I don't expect them to go in bombing, but
they're going to have to find a way to see if anything really
changes in Syria.''


   Turkish Foreign Minister Ismail Cem said his government would
``carefully follow whether Syria is keeping and implementing these
promises.''

