
	   DAHANIEH, Gaza Strip (AP) _ Taking a major step toward
statehood, the Palestinians on Tuesday inaugurated Gaza
International Airport, their first gateway to the world, with
cheers, tears and an outpouring of patriotism.
	   An Egypt Air plane was the first to land on the desert tarmac in
the southern Gaza Strip at 8:30 a.m. (0630 gmt).
	   But the emotional highlight was the touchdown of the first
Palestinian Airlines plane, a Fokker 50. After landing, the pilot
and co-pilot raised Palestinian flags high above their heads as
they descended the stairway. A chant of ``Allahu Akbar,'' or God is
Great, rose from of a crowd of thousands of Palestinians who had
pushed their way onto the airfield to join the celebrations.
	   ``You are a beautiful sight,'' Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat
later told the Palestinian crew in the VIP lounge lavishly
decorated with deep red Oriental carpets and wall mosaics.
	   Throughout the morning, Arafat walked from the lounge to the
tarmac seven times to greet planes from Egypt, Morocco, Jordan,
Spain, the European Union and two Palestinian Airlines flights.
	   ``This is a preparation for the declaration of the Palestinian
state,'' Arafat said, smiling broadly and flashing a V sign.
	   However, Israel continues to control the airspace and has the
authority to shut down the airfield at any time. It will monitor
arriving passengers and cargo, and can keep travelers or goods out
if it considers them a danger to Israeli security.
	   Disputes between Israel and the Palestinian Authority over
security had delayed the airport opening for more than two years.
	   In a sign of cooperation, Israeli and Palestinian security
agents approached the Egypt Air jet together Tuesday and collected
the passports of the passengers, including Egyptian Cabinet
ministers and comedian Adel Imam, in white bags.
	   Throughout the morning, there were spontaneous celebrations. As
a police marching band played bagpipes, airport workers, policemen
and Cabinet ministers held each other by their hands and danced in
a circle. Some kissed and embraced their neighbors, others wiped
away tears and several officers waved their rifles in the air.
	   In one corner of the airfield, about 300 people gathered around
a man and a boy riding mules that moved to the beat of drums.
	   The dlrs 75 million airport will provide a boost to the troubled
Palestinian economy, permitting the export of Palestinian flowers
and farm produce that until now were shipped out via Israel, often
with difficulties and delays.
	   The airfield will also make it easier for Palestinians to travel
abroad, although a majority of Gazans are probably too poor to be
able to afford an air ticket.
	   Until now, Palestinians wanting to fly abroad needed permission
to enter Israel and fly out of Ben Gurion International airport
near Tel Aviv. The other option was to travel by land to Jordan and
catch flights there.
	   Palestinians living in the West Bank still need a permit to
cross Israel into Gaza to get to the airport. Travel is expected to
become easier once a land route between the West Bank and Gaza
opens next month.
	   Israel's government does not permit Israelis to use the
Palestinian airport, citing security reasons. However, Israeli
Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon said Tuesday that this might change
in the future.
	   The opening of the airport was negotiated during last month's
U.S.-sponsored Mideast summit near Washington. As part of the
accord, Israel also withdrew troops in the northern West Bank last
week and released 250 Palestinian prisoners.
	   A Palestinian industrial park between Gaza and Israel is to open
next month, while Israeli-Palestinian negotiations on a Palestinian
seaport in Gaza are continuing.
	   Gaza International, with the call letters LVGZ, was designed in
an Oriental style with graceful arches and elaborate tiles imported
from Morocco. The airport has one passenger terminal, a VIP lounge
and a three-kilometer (two-mile)-long runway. A 1-meter
(4-foot)-tall poster of Arafat hangs from the control tower wall.
	   Palestine Airlines, with a small fleet that includes one Boeing
727, will begin direct flights to Jordan, Egypt and Saudi Arabia
next week.
	   In the first weeks, airport operations will have to rely on some
improvisation. Major pieces of equipment, including the controls
for the control tower, are still held up at the Israeli port of
Ashdod. Tuesday's planes were guided to a safe landing by a
portable control panel installed in a van.
	   Despite its temporary shortcomings, many Palestinians consider
the airport a big step toward independence. For those living in the
small, overcrowded Gaza Strip, which is ringed by the Mediterranean
on one side and by barbed wire on the other three, it may help ease
the feeling of being trapped.
	   ``Now we will be able to travel without the Israeli procedures
that we usually must go through,'' said Khaled Salmeh, who studies
economics at Gaza City University and plans to fly next month to
Saudi Arabia, for a pilgrimage to Mecca.
 &UR; kl	   

	   DAHANIEH, Gaza Strip (AP) _ Taking a major step toward
statehood, the Palestinians on Tuesday inaugurated Gaza
International Airport, their first gateway to the world, with
cheers, tears and an outpouring of patriotism.
	   An Egypt Air plane was the first to land on the desert tarmac in
the southern Gaza Strip at 8:30 a.m. (0630 gmt).
	   But the emotional highlight was the touchdown of the first
Palestinian Airlines plane, a Fokker 50. After landing, the pilot
and co-pilot raised Palestinian flags high above their heads as
they descended the stairway. A chant of ``Allahu Akbar,'' or God is
Great, rose from of a crowd of thousands of Palestinians who had
pushed their way onto the airfield to join the celebrations.
	   ``You are a beautiful sight,'' Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat
later told the Palestinian crew in the VIP lounge lavishly
decorated with deep red Oriental carpets and wall mosaics.
	   Throughout the morning, Arafat walked from the lounge to the
tarmac seven times to greet planes from Egypt, Morocco, Jordan,
Spain, the European Union and two Palestinian Airlines flights.
	   ``This is a preparation for the declaration of the Palestinian
state,'' Arafat said, smiling broadly and flashing a V sign.
	   However, Israel continues to control the airspace and has the
authority to shut down the airfield at any time. It will monitor
arriving passengers and cargo, and can keep travelers or goods out
if it considers them a danger to Israeli security.
	   Disputes between Israel and the Palestinian Authority over
security had delayed the airport opening for more than two years.
	   In a sign of cooperation, Israeli and Palestinian security
agents approached the Egypt Air jet together Tuesday and collected
the passports of the passengers, including Egyptian Cabinet
ministers and comedian Adel Imam, in white bags.
	   Throughout the morning, there were spontaneous celebrations. As
a police marching band played bagpipes, airport workers, policemen
and Cabinet ministers held each other by their hands and danced in
a circle. Some kissed and embraced their neighbors, others wiped
away tears and several officers waved their rifles in the air.
	   In one corner of the airfield, about 300 people gathered around
a man and a boy riding mules that moved to the beat of drums.
	   The dlrs 75 million airport will provide a boost to the troubled
Palestinian economy, permitting the export of Palestinian flowers
and farm produce that until now were shipped out via Israel, often
with difficulties and delays.
	   The airfield will also make it easier for Palestinians to travel
abroad, although a majority of Gazans are probably too poor to be
able to afford an air ticket.
	   Until now, Palestinians wanting to fly abroad needed permission
to enter Israel and fly out of Ben Gurion International airport
near Tel Aviv. The other option was to travel by land to Jordan and
catch flights there.
	   Palestinians living in the West Bank still need a permit to
cross Israel into Gaza to get to the airport. Travel is expected to
become easier once a land route between the West Bank and Gaza
opens next month.
	   Israel's government does not permit Israelis to use the
Palestinian airport, citing security reasons. However, Israeli
Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon said Tuesday that this might change
in the future.
	   The opening of the airport was negotiated during last month's
U.S.-sponsored Mideast summit near Washington. As part of the
accord, Israel also withdrew troops in the northern West Bank last
week and released 250 Palestinian prisoners.
	   A Palestinian industrial park between Gaza and Israel is to open
next month, while Israeli-Palestinian negotiations on a Palestinian
seaport in Gaza are continuing.
	   Gaza International, with the call letters LVGZ, was designed in
an Oriental style with graceful arches and elaborate tiles imported
from Morocco. The airport has one passenger terminal, a VIP lounge
and a three-kilometer (two-mile)-long runway. A 1-meter
(4-foot)-tall poster of Arafat hangs from the control tower wall.
	   Palestine Airlines, with a small fleet that includes one Boeing
727, will begin direct flights to Jordan, Egypt and Saudi Arabia
next week.
	   In the first weeks, airport operations will have to rely on some
improvisation. Major pieces of equipment, including the controls
for the control tower, are still held up at the Israeli port of
Ashdod. Tuesday's planes were guided to a safe landing by a
portable control panel installed in a van.
	   Despite its temporary shortcomings, many Palestinians consider
the airport a big step toward independence. For those living in the
small, overcrowded Gaza Strip, which is ringed by the Mediterranean
on one side and by barbed wire on the other three, it may help ease
the feeling of being trapped.
	   ``Now we will be able to travel without the Israeli procedures
that we usually must go through,'' said Khaled Salmeh, who studies
economics at Gaza City University and plans to fly next month to
Saudi Arabia, for a pilgrimage to Mecca.
 &UR; kl

	   AMMAN, Jordan (AP) _ The first Palestinian commercial flight
landed at Amman's Marka Airport on Saturday, inaugurating an air
route between Jordan and the autonomous Gaza Strip.
	   The Falcon F-50 short-haul plane carried 48 passengers, mostly
Palestinian businessmen and students. The plane will return later
in the day.
	   Last weekend, the Palestinians inaugurated an airport in the
Mediterranean city of Gaza under the U.S.-brokered Wye River accord
which envisages Israel ceding more lands to the Palestinians in
return for security guarantees.
	   Jasser Ziyyad, director-general of the Jordanian Civil Aviation
Authority, said Jordan agreed with the Palestinians earlier in the
week on four weekly flights between them _ two by the Palestinian
airline and two for Jordan.
	   Meanwhile, Jordanian newspapers quoted unnamed Palestinian
aviation officials as saying one more passenger plane will be added
to the Palestinian fleet of three short-haul aircraft.
	   It said the addition was necessary to transport an estimated
3,600 Palestinian Muslims who wish to travel to Saudi Arabia in
early March to perform the annual pilgrimage to holy shrines in
that country.
 &UR; jah-jjh/vj

	   JERUSALEM (AP) _ Israel has threatened to close down the
Palestinian-run Gaza airport over a security violation, an Israeli
official said Tuesday, a move that could further undermine the
already fragile peace process.
	   Palestinian airport workers refused to allow Israeli security
officials to check the identity of passengers who arrived on an
Egyptian plane Sunday afternoon, most of whom worked for the
Palestinian Authority, according to Civilian Airport Authority
Director Nir Yarkoni.
	   ``The Transportation Minister asked me to tell the Palestinians
that if this continues, we won't allow the airport operate,'' he
told The Associated Press.
	   Yarkoni said he conveyed the message in a letter sent Monday to
chairman of the Palestinian Civil Aviation Authority Brig. Gen.
Fayez Zeidan.
	   Zeidan was not immediately available for comment.
	   Israel retains security control over flights arriving to Gaza
International Airport.
	   The airport's opening last month, stipulated by the accords
brokered by U.S. President Bill Clinton at Wye River, Maryland in
October, was hailed by Palestinians as a milestone toward
independence and statehood.
	   Since then, Israel has accused the Palestinians of failing to
contain anti-Israel violence, and has frozen the accords. The
Palestinians, in turn, accuse Israel of reneging on an agreement to
release Palestinians jailed for anti-Israel activities.
 &UR; sb-rk

	   JERUSALEM (AP) _ Israel has threatened to close down the
Palestinian-run Gaza airport over a security violation, an Israeli
official said Tuesday, a move that could further undermine the
already fragile peace process.
	   Palestinian airport workers refused to allow Israeli security
officials to check the identity of passengers who arrived on an
Egyptian plane Sunday afternoon, most of whom worked for the
Palestinian Authority, according to Civilian Airport Authority
Director Nir Yarkoni.
	   ``The Transportation Minister asked me to tell the Palestinians
that if this continues, we won't allow the airport operate,'' he
told The Associated Press.
	   Yarkoni said he conveyed the message in a letter Monday to
chairman of the Palestinian Civil Aviation Authority Brig. Gen.
Fayez Zeidan.
	   Zeidan was not immediately available for comment.
	   Israel retains security control over flights arriving to Gaza
International Airport.
	   The airport's opening last month, stipulated by the accords
brokered by U.S. President Bill Clinton at Wye River, Maryland in
October, was hailed by Palestinians as a milestone toward
independence and statehood.
	   Since then, Israel has accused the Palestinians of failing to
contain anti-Israel violence, and has frozen the accords. The
Palestinians, in turn, accuse Israel of reneging on an agreement to
release Palestinians jailed for anti-Israel activities.

	   JERUSALEM (AP) _ Israeli security officials delayed two planes
from taking off from the Palestinian airport on Wednesday, the
latest tensions in a rare area of Israeli-Palestinian cooperation.
	   A plane bound for Amman, Jordan was delayed for two hours over
an Israeli demand that Palestinian officials inspect the luggage of
a Palestinian passenger, Israel radio reported. The plane left with
the passenger aboard, but without his luggage.
	   Israeli officials also delayed a plane making a stopover from
Saudi Arabia to Cairo, it said. Israeli airport security officials
were not available for comment.
	   Abdel Razek Yehia, a Palestinian official who helped negotiate
the airport's opening, confirmed the delays. He said such
differences did not undermine the peace process.
	   ``Every day we have differences,'' he told The Associated Press.
``We are all doing all our best to continue the peace process.''
	   The airport's opening last month, stipulated by the accords
brokered by U.S. President Bill Clinton at Wye River, Maryland in
October, was hailed by Palestinians as a milestone toward
independence and statehood.
	   Israel retains security control over flights arriving at Gaza
International Airport, and Palestinian security officials consult
with their Israeli counterparts.
	   Earlier this week, Israel threatened to close down the Gaza
airport when Palestinian airport workers refused to allow Israeli
security officials to check the identity of passengers who arrived
on an Egyptian plane, most of whom worked for the Palestinian
Authority.
	   Palestinian officials said that Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat
and his entourage were aboard the plane in question, and that
exempted the plane from Israeli security checks.
	   Since Wye, Israel has accused the Palestinians of failing to
contain anti-Israel violence, and has frozen the accords. The
Palestinians, in turn, accuse Israel of reneging on an agreement to
release Palestinians jailed for anti-Israel activities.
	   (rk) 	   

	   JERUSALEM (AP) _ Israeli security officials delayed two planes
from taking off from the Palestinian airport on Wednesday, marking
the latest tensions in a rare area of Israeli-Palestinian
cooperation.
 &UR; A plane, 2nd graf, pvs	   


   RAFAH, Gaza _ Palestinians celebrated with euphoria the
long-delayed opening of their international airport Tuesday as a
parade of planes swooped down from cottony skies and glided to a
literal red-carpet landing in the flatlands of Gaza.


   With brass bands, bag-pipes and grandiloquent speeches,
Palestinian officials made it clear that they see the sleekly
modern airport as the most concrete symbol yet of their fledgling
sovereignty. The high emotion and pageantry Tuesday stood in stark
contrast to the muted response last week to an Israeli withdrawal
from the West Bank.


   ``This is my day of great joy as a Palestinian refugee,'' said
Ahmad Abdel Rachman, the general secretary of the Palestinian
Cabinet. ``I am standing on Palestinian soil, and I have an
airport, I have a flag, I have an airplane. This is our path to the
independent Palestinian state.''


   The airport, a potential economic lifeline to the depressed Gaza
Strip, was completed more than a year ago, with about $60 million
in grants from Egypt and Morocco as well as from Spain and other
European Union countries. But its fate became mired in the
stalemated peace talks until the peace memorandum signed in
Washington last month provided a breakthrough.


   The Gaza International Airport, with 400 employees, will open
for regular business next week. Royal Air Maroc is expected to
begin Gaza-Casablanca service. And the Palestinian National Airline
will fly routes to Amman, Cairo and Jidda with three planes: two
Fokker 50s donated by the Netherlands, and a 20-year-old Boeing 727
given by Saudi Prince Walled bin Talal. There are 20 pilots, most
with Egyptian flying certificates.


   ``It may look like a little airport to you, but to us, it's
bigger than John F. Kennedy,'' said Nabil Shurafa, a travel agent
in Gaza City.


   The alabaster towers of the new airport rise from a particularly
hardscrabble stretch of southern Gaza near the Egyptian border.
Thousands of local residents pushed at its gates Tuesday morning,
begging to be let into the closed ceremony, gaping at the
elaborate, Moroccan-style architecture, and ducking with the whoosh
of each landing plane.


   For Mafa Barbakh, an elderly woman wrapped in black from head to
toe, the moment was too important to experience from afar. Like
many, she said she had never even seen a plane before. She wanted
to be on the tarmac, to ululate and raise her hands to the heavens.
She finally did, when the gates were opened and the Palestinians
swarmed the grounds _ chanting, dancing, laying down prayer rugs
and otherwise making it their own.


   ``I want to fly to Mecca,'' she said. ``I hope God gives me this
gift, to go up in the sky like a bird, on Palestinian wings. Hey,
we have Palestinian passports now. I can travel with my Palestinian
passport on a Palestinian plane. This is Palestine!''


   At 8:30 a.m., with a punctuality remarkable for Gaza, the first
of seven planes landed: a white Airbus from Egypt, disgorging
government officials and three actors. One, a comedian, Adel Imam,
caused the the Palestine National Airline's entire staff of flight
attendants _ 18 women in navy pants suits and Muslim head scarves _
to jump up and down and squeal.


   Aircraft carrying delegations from other principal donors to the
project followed: the Jordanians, the Moroccans, the Spanish, the
Dutch and, aboard an Israeli charter, some European Union
officials. The bagpipes, a holdover from the days of the British
Mandate, seemed a disconcerting greeting to many who strode down
the red carpet past upturned bayonets on their way into the V.I.P.
lounge to see Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian leader.


   Last week, the airport was named Yasser Arafat International
Airport by Arafat's aides, and signs were duly posted. But the
Palestinian leader was not pleased. The signs were taken down, and
the original entry banner restrung: Gaza International Airport, it
said Tuesday.


   The V.I.P. lounge, a lavish building decorated with Moroccan
mosaics, crystal chandeliers and a fountain, bears a gilded dome
atop its roof, meant to echo the Dome of the Rock Mosque in
Jerusalem. In a way that irked Israeli officials, Jerusalem was
itself a constant theme as Palestinian officials got swept away by
the moment.


   ``God willing, we will open the Jerusalem Airport next,'' Arafat
said. ``God willing, we will land soon at the Jerusalem Airport.''


   The fate of Jerusalem will be debated in the final-status peace
talks, which began last week. The Israelis say it will remain
undivided, but the Palestinians want to reclaim East Jerusalem,
annexed by Israel in 1967, as the capital of their eventual state.


   Last week, under the peace memorandum signed in Washington, the
first phase of a three-part Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank
tripled the amount of territory under complete Palestinian control.
Still, it was sparsely populated, rural land dotted with small
towns and villages. The Palestinian response was quiet, and Arafat
received only two calls of congratulations from world leaders: one
from Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, the other from a
Norwegian official.


   On Tuesday, in contrast, a who's who of the Palestinian
leadership, flanked by dignitaries from the Arab world and Europe,
declared the airport's opening a milestone, while the Palestinian
police danced with their rifles in the air. The officials said it
would ease the claustrophobia of Gazans, who feel locked into their
dusty strip of territory by Israeli border checkpoints most do not
have permits to cross.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   nn


   ``These people in Gaza have been living in this ghetto since
1948,'' Abdel Rachman said, talking with foreign reporters. ``More
than 60 to 70 percent have never left. Now with free access to the
rest of the world, they will feel they're human, like all of you.''


   During the year-and-a-half delay before the airport opened, the
Palestinian airline operated on a limited basis out of El Arish in
Egypt. Passengers traveled by bus across the border and often
waited hours before departure. Most business travelers flew out of
Cairo; those who imported goods relied on Israeli ports or the
airport in Tel Aviv.


   ``Now I'll be able to travel like a regular businessman, on
overnight trips,'' Sayeed el-Madhoun, who owns a floor-covering
company, said while videotaping the ceremony. ``And it'll make it
easier and cheaper to bring materials in and out.''


   When the airport opens for regular service next week, there will
still be difficulties to resolve.


   Some $15 million in donated equipment, including radar and
high-tech air-traffic-control devices, has been held up in a
dispute between Israel and the donor nations. Most of it has sat in
the port of Ashdod for the last year. Now the Port Authority of
Israel is demanding $650,000 in storage fees to release it.


   And about $3 million in night-landing equipment donated by
Germany has been held in Hamburg because the Germans fear similar
difficulties with Israeli customs and security officials.


   As a result, the airport will at first handle only daylight
flights.


   Also, the Israelis will retain considerable control over routes,
flight schedules and security. Israeli aviation officials, in fact,
have described the Gaza airport as a new airport under Israel's
jurisdiction.


   As they do at some of the land crossings into Jordan, the
Israelis will operate a kind of shadow document-checking system.
Palestinian officials will review passengers' documents, passing
them behind a screen to Israelis.


   Fadda Jabr, a former negotiator for the Palestinian Authority,
brushed aside those issues as mere ``technical difficulties.''


   ``Today is the concrete evidence of the success of the camp of
peace,'' he said. ``Now the ink of the agreement has turned into
something we can see, we can touch and we can admire. Lovely, isn't
it?''



   RAFAH, Gaza Strip _ Cruising at 19,000 feet on Saturday in the
cockpit of the first Palestinian Airlines flight to depart from
Gaza's new international airport, Capt. Jamal Al-How from the
Jabaliya refugee camp could not restrain himself.


   ``At this historic moment, taking off for the first time in
history from a Palestinian airport, all the languages of the world
cannot express my pride and joy,'' he declared. ``I thank the
heroic Palestinian people, which sacrificed everything it had so
that we could reach this moment.''


   Earlier, applause rang through the cabin as the 48-seat Fokker
50 propeller plane, painted with the Palestinian national colors of
red, green, black and white, took to the air. Mohammad Abdel Salam
from Bethlehem, the steward, greeted the passengers of Flight 152,
inaugurating regular service from the Gaza airport, which was
ceremonially opened last month.


   ``Welcome aboard the first flight from Yasser Arafat
International Airport, bound for Amman,'' Abdel Salam said over the
loudspeaker. ``Thank you for choosing Palestinian Airlines, and we
wish you all a pleasant flight.''


   Times have changed. In the not-too-distant past, the combination
of the words ``Palestinian'' and ``airplane'' evoked images of
gun-waving hijackers from the PLO. Now the Palestinians are running
their own airline from Gaza, with planes flown by former PLO
pilots, and Palestinian security men checking bags and passengers
for would-be terrorists.


   Established in 1996, the tiny Palestinian airline was an
outgrowth of the accords with Israel on Palestinian self-rule. It
has two Fokker 50s received from the Netherlands, and a Boeing 727
donated by Prince Walid bin Talal of Saudi Arabia, which is still
being prepared for service.


   Starting operations in 1997 without a home airport, the
airline's first flights left from Port Said in Egypt, ferrying
Muslim pilgrims to Saudi Arabia. Regular service began a few months
later from the Egyptian town of El Arish to Amman and to the Saudi
Arabian city of Jeddah. Departing passengers had to make a
night-long trek by bus from Gaza to El Arish, moving slowly through
Palestinian, Israeli and Egyptian checkpoints to board flights that
took far less time than the ground journey.


   Flying from Gaza for the first time on Saturday, passengers
remarked on the simple convenience of going directly from home to
their local airport, avoiding Israeli interrogations and security
checks at border crossings and at Ben-Gurion airport near Tel Aviv,
Israel. It enhanced their sense that, while there was no
Palestinian state yet, something like one was emerging from the
often-troubled negotiations with Israel.


   ``I drove here with my family, like anyone else in the world,''
said Ahmad al-Ghandour, a department head in the Palestinian
Authority. ``I'm leaving like people do everywhere else, on your
own plane, with your own passport.''


   Mahfouz Othman, a psychiatrist from Rafah, said that he was
relieved of the anxiety that often plagued his departures in the
past, when he was worried that he might be turned back or detained.
``I feel that I'm keeping my dignity; these are Palestinians like
us,'' he said as he handed his passport to a Palestinian police
officer. ``At a personal, human level, this is a changing point in
our lives.''


   Not entirely. A short while after Othman spoke, Palestinian
security officers and Israeli counterparts keeping watch at the
airport got into a dispute about departure procedures, delaying
take-off for three-and-a-half hours.


   Fayez Zaidan, the airline chairman, came to the passenger lounge
to encourage his customers. ``We are with you facing the
Israelis,'' he told them. ``This is your airport.'' In the end, the
passengers were bused to the adjacent Rafah border terminal where
they went through passport control under Israeli supervision,
before returning to the plane. A few hours later, returning
passengers were delayed two hours at the same terminal for Israeli
security and document checks.


   But the first-day hitches did not mar the patriotic spirit on
the first flight from Gaza, and its passengers were greeted with
roses in Amman. Regular flights to Jeddah and Cairo, Egypt, are
scheduled to start in the next few days. The airline expects to
carry thousands to the annual Muslim pilgrimage to Saudi Arabia in
March, and there are long-range plans to expand service to Cyprus,
Turkey and Greece.


   ``I always imagined that it would come,'' said Zaidan, who is
also head of the Palestinian Civil Aviation Authority. ``There were
many obstacles and difficulties. I'm very happy that I could
achieve this goal of establishing a civil aviation authority from
zero, an airport from zero, an airline from zero. We did it.''


   The company has sent some of its 400 employees to train in
Morocco and Jordan, but the core of its crews and staff served in
what was once the air wing of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, or worked in airlines in the Arab world.


   Palestinians also gained experience in the 1980s in Maldives
Airways, which was effectively owned by the PLO, and in Air Bissau,
a government-owned carrier in Africa in which the PLO was a major
partner.


   When it was still a guerrilla movement, the PLO sent volunteers
to flight academies in Pakistan and Yugoslavia, and in the 1980s,
Palestinian fighter pilots served in the air forces of Syria, Libya
and Yemen. The PLO air fleet consisted then of small transport
planes and helicopters, used mostly for travel between the
organization's headquarters.


   ``Like any revolution struggling for freedom, we were fighting
for the liberation of Palestine,'' said Yassin al-Hawamdi, a pilot.
``Now we're building up a state.''


   For now, however, Palestinians do not control their skies.
Take-offs and landings must be reported to the Israelis. Flights
from Gaza are barred from crossing Israel's southern air-space
because there are military installations en route, compelling
flights to Amman to detour over the Sinai peninsula, meaning that
they take about 90 minutes. Sophisticated landing equipment is
still being held in an Israeli port, and planes only land and take
off at the Gaza airport in daylight.


   Yet for the Palestinian Airlines staff, operating their national
carrier from their soil is a source of great satisfaction.


   ``I have traveled everywhere, to 70 countries,'' said Abdel
Salam, the steward, who worked 15 years in Kuwait Airways. ``Now I
feel different. I'm taking care of my own people. We waited a long
time to realize our dream.''



   RAFAH, Gaza Strip _ Cruising at 19,000 feet on Saturday in the
cockpit of the first Palestinian Airlines flight to depart from
Gaza's new international airport, Capt. Jamal Al-How from the
Jabaliya refugee camp could not restrain himself.


   ``At this historic moment, taking off for the first time in
history from a Palestinian airport, all the languages of the world
cannot express my pride and joy,'' he declared. ``I thank the
heroic Palestinian people, which sacrificed everything it had so
that we could reach this moment.''


   Earlier, applause rang through the cabin as the 48-seat Fokker
50 propeller plane, painted with the Palestinian national colors of
red, green, black and white, took to the air. Mohammad Abdel Salam
from Bethlehem, the steward, greeted the passengers of Flight 152,
inaugurating regular service from the Gaza airport, which was
ceremonially opened last month.


   ``Welcome aboard the first flight from Yasser Arafat
International Airport, bound for Amman,'' Abdel Salam said over the
loudspeaker. ``Thank you for choosing Palestinian Airlines, and we
wish you all a pleasant flight.''


   Times have changed. In the not-too-distant past, the combination
of the words ``Palestinian'' and ``airplane'' evoked images of
gun-waving hijackers from the PLO. Now the Palestinians are running
their own airline from Gaza, with planes flown by former PLO
pilots, and Palestinian security men checking bags and passengers
for would-be terrorists.


   Established in 1996, the tiny Palestinian airline was an
outgrowth of the accords with Israel on Palestinian self-rule. It
has two Fokker 50s received from the Netherlands, and a Boeing 727
donated by Prince Walid bin Talal of Saudi Arabia, which is still
being prepared for service.


   Starting operations in 1997 without a home airport, the
airline's first flights left from Port Said in Egypt, ferrying
Muslim pilgrims to Saudi Arabia. Regular service began a few months
later from the Egyptian town of El Arish to Amman and to the Saudi
Arabian city of Jidda. Departing passengers had to make a
night-long trek by bus from Gaza to El Arish, moving slowly through
Palestinian, Israeli and Egyptian checkpoints to board flights that
took far less time than the ground journey.


   Flying from Gaza for the first time on Saturday, passengers
remarked on the simple convenience of going directly from home to
their local airport, avoiding Israeli interrogations and security
checks at border crossings and at Ben-Gurion airport near Tel Aviv,
Israel. It enhanced their sense that, while there was no
Palestinian state yet, something like one was emerging from the
often-troubled negotiations with Israel.


   ``I drove here with my family, like anyone else in the world,''
said Ahmad al-Ghandour, a department head in the Palestinian
Authority. ``I'm leaving like people do everywhere else, on your
own plane, with your own passport.''


   Mahfouz Othman, a psychiatrist from Rafah, said that he was
relieved of the anxiety that often plagued his departures in the
past, when he was worried that he might be turned back or detained.
``I feel that I'm keeping my dignity; these are Palestinians like
us,'' he said as he handed his passport to a Palestinian police
officer. ``At a personal, human level, this is a changing point in
our lives.''


   Not entirely. A short while after Othman spoke, Palestinian
security officers and Israeli counterparts keeping watch at the
airport got into a dispute about departure procedures, delaying
take-off for three-and-a-half hours.


   Fayez Zaidan, the airline chairman, came to the passenger lounge
to encourage his customers. ``We are with you facing the
Israelis,'' he told them. ``This is your airport.'' In the end, the
passengers were bused to the adjacent Rafah border terminal where
they went through passport control under Israeli supervision,
before returning to the plane. A few hours later, returning
passengers were delayed two hours at the same terminal for Israeli
security and document checks.


   But the first-day hitches did not mar the patriotic spirit on
the first flight from Gaza, and its passengers were greeted with
roses in Amman. Regular flights to Jidda and Cairo, Egypt, are
scheduled to start in the next few days. The airline expects to
carry thousands to the annual Muslim pilgrimage to Saudi Arabia in
March, and there are long-range plans to expand service to Cyprus,
Turkey and Greece.


   ``I always imagined that it would come,'' said Zaidan, who is
also head of the Palestinian Civil Aviation Authority. ``There were
many obstacles and difficulties. I'm very happy that I could
achieve this goal of establishing a civil aviation authority from
zero, an airport from zero, an airline from zero. We did it.''


   The company has sent some of its 400 employees to train in
Morocco and Jordan, but the core of its crews and staff served in
what was once the air wing of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, or worked in airlines in the Arab world.


   Palestinians also gained experience in the 1980s in Maldives
Airways, which was effectively owned by the PLO, and in Air Bissau,
a government-owned carrier in Africa in which the PLO was a major
partner.


   When it was still a guerrilla movement, the PLO sent volunteers
to flight academies in Pakistan and Yugoslavia, and in the 1980s,
Palestinian fighter pilots served in the air forces of Syria, Libya
and Yemen. The PLO air fleet consisted then of small transport
planes and helicopters, used mostly for travel between the
organization's headquarters.


   ``Like any revolution struggling for freedom, we were fighting
for the liberation of Palestine,'' said Yassin al-Hawamdi, a pilot.
``Now we're building up a state.''


   For now, however, Palestinians do not control their skies.
Take-offs and landings must be reported to the Israelis. Flights
from Gaza are barred from crossing Israel's southern air-space
because there are military installations en route, compelling
flights to Amman to detour over the Sinai peninsula, meaning that
they take about 90 minutes. Sophisticated landing equipment is
still being held in an Israeli port, and planes only land and take
off at the Gaza airport in daylight.


   Yet for the Palestinian Airlines staff, operating their national
carrier from their soil is a source of great satisfaction.


   ``I have traveled everywhere, to 70 countries,'' said Abdel
Salam, the steward, who worked 15 years for Kuwait Airways. ``Now I
feel different. I'm taking care of my own people. We waited a long
time to realize our dream.''

