
	   WASHINGTON (AP) _ The United States and other economic powers
moved ahead Saturday toward an overhaul of the world's financial
system to prevent widening market turmoil from pushing more
countries into recession.
	   U.S. President Bill Clinton telephoned British Prime Minister
Tony Blair and French President Jacques Chirac to lobby personally
for a set of proposals he put forward Friday. Central to the U.S.
idea is to use the International Monetary Fund to provide more
money, faster, to countries threatened with a flight of panicked
investors.
	   Blair and Chirac said they liked the U.S. approach, and other
countries as well have had favorable reactions in discussions with
administration economic officials, presidential spokesman Joe
Lockhart said.
	   Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin and Federal Reserve Chairman
Alan Greenspan, who helped develop the proposals, sought the
endorsements of finance ministers and central bank presidents from
the world's seven richest countries.
	   After hearing Rubin explain the suggestion that new IMF credit
lines be established for countries threatened with investor flight,
Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa told reporters: ``He asked
me to support it, and I said I would.''
	   The Group of Seven meeting, at historic Blair House across
Pennsylvania Avenue from the White House was expected to be pivotal
in trying to develop strategies to halt a 15-month economic crisis,
as are sessions beginning Sunday of the 182-nation IMF and World
Bank. The World Bank generally loans money for development projects
in poor countries, and the IMF oversees rescue efforts for
countries experiencing financial difficulties.
	   A collapse of currencies and stock markets triggered by a flight
of foreign investment money has pushed several Asian nations into
steep recession, leveled the Russian economy and is now threatening
to strike Brazil and other nations in Latin America.
	   While other countries had their own ideas about how to address
the current market turmoil, Canadian Finance Minister Paul Martin
said he believes the crisis' urgency is molding ``a growing
consensus about what needs to be done.''
	   Britain's top finance official, Chancellor of the Exchequer
Gordon Brown, also sounded a note of urgency and suggested that the
Bank of England might act as early as next week to cut interest
rates. That would follow the lead of the Federal Reserve, which cut
a key U.S. rate by a quarter-point last Tuesday to help ward off
recession in the United States.
	   ``As we meet here in Washington, we are conscious that more than
a quarter of the world is in recession, that the second largest
economy in the world, Japan, is in recession and that the social
casualties of the Asian crisis are rising in numbers,'' Brown said.
He told reporters ``strong, decisive and united leadership'' is
needed to turn talk into action.
	   Finance ministers from 24 developing countries appealed for
lower interest rates from major industrial nations as a way to take
pressure off their foreign debt burdens and ``help restore
confidence in international finance markets.''
	   Still, it was far from certain that all differences will be
resolved in coming days. U.S. officials already have rejected a
French proposal to turn the IMF's interim committee into a more
permanent crisis-coordination body.
	   ``My guess is we won't find a silver bullet, but we will come
out with a process,'' World Bank President James Wolfensohn said.
	   The U.S. proposal does prescribe new money for the IMF but would
require Congress to approve the administration's request of dlrs 18
billion to replenish IMF resources depleted by the need to assemble
more than dlrs 100 billion in bailouts for Thailand, Indonesia,
South Korea and Russia.
	   That approval is in doubt given significant Republican
opposition in the House. GOP Leader Dick Armey, R-Texas, said
Clinton's call for quicker release of IMF money is precisely the
wrong approach for an agency that has failed so far to halt the
crisis from widening.
	   Other aspects of change being considered are to increase banking
supervision in poor countries and provide more loans to help
stricken corporations in crisis countries get back on their feet.
	   The United States also was pushing to get the IMF and other
donors behind a rescue for Brazil of perhaps dlrs 30 billion, which
could be announced soon after Sunday's presidential elections
there.
	   Rubin and Greenspan pressed the case for Japan to act more
forcefully in Saturday's discussions with Miyazawa. U.S. officials
have said troubled Asian countries cannot hope to resume growth
unless Japan cleans up its banking troubles and emerges from its
own recession.
	   In a Treasury statement, Rubin welcomed Japan's offer of dlrs 30
billion in new loans to support other Asian nations and said
Miyazawa ``explained his government's intention to take all
possible steps to promote financial stability.''

	   MADRID, Spain (AP) _ The chief executive of the International
Monetary Fund said Wednesday there should be a slight improvement
in global economic fortunes next year spearheaded by Europe and the
United States.
	   Michel Camdessus, IMF managing director, predicted world growth
of around 2.5 percent in 1999, creeping up from the recently
revised-down figure for this year of 2 percent.
	   Camdessus was in the Spanish capital to attend the fourth
meeting of the so-called Montevideo Circle, an informal gathering
of top ranking politicians and officials who annually hold a
behind-closed-door brainstorming session on Latin American issues.
	   The IMF chief told reporters that Europe and the United States _
``the two motors of the world economy'' _ were still going strong,
despite some slowdown in America and Great Britain.
	   He said Asia should be able to keep its economic head just above
water, avoiding negative growth next year.
	   Camdessus said the immediate task was to ensure that Latin
America weathered the financial storm that began in Thailand 15
months ago before spreading from Asia to precipitate Russia's
recent collapse.
	   ``It is a vital obligation to prevent the Latin domino from
falling,'' Camdessus said, praising Spain's recent offer to help
fund emergency credits to the region under threat from investor
flight.
	   He said he hoped other European countries with business
interests in Latin America _ such as Italy, France and Germany _
would follow the Spanish example.
	   The IMF and the Brazilian government are putting the final
touches to an emergency three-year-package that should be ratified
within weeks, Camdessus said. The package has been estimated to
total dlrs 30 billion.
	   ``Brazil will not collapse,'' he said, adding that Argentina and
Chile were among the keenest to see the IMF reach agreement with
their giant neighbor.
	   Less upbeat about Russia, Camdessus said the Fund was still
working toward a financing package, but that the government still
lacked a program. This, he said, would take time, and appealed to
governments to provide humanitarian aid in the interim.
	   The IMF has put together bailout packages totaling over $100
billion during what Camdessus called ``the most uncertain year
ever.''
	   He said the crisis has underlined the need for prevention, and
the transformation of the Fund's primary role away from that of
``the firefighter who arrives when the fire is already burning.''
	   Greater private sector involvement in the prevention and
resolution of future economic crisis would help, Camdessus said.
``Now, the private sector tends to run away and leave the work to
the governments,'' he said.
	   Camdessus also said he was aware of recent criticism of
excessive IMF secrecy, but he said his own efforts to open up the
Fund have been blocked by governments demanding discretion.
	   Camdessus said that those who viewed the crisis as a critique of
the Fund's promotion of world economic liberalization were
mistaken. The man who has headed the IMF for 12 years said that it
simply demonstrated the need to carry through liberalization
programs properly.
	   (jt/krt)


   RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil _ When Josue da Silva stepped up to the
consumer society four years ago, the ground underfoot felt solid
and endless.


   For the first time in years inflation in Brazil was under
control, and he and his wife had steady jobs. They moved out of a
cramped room behind a store into an apartment and signed to buy
furniture, appliances, a stereo system and even a car.


   But these days the foundation beneath da Silva is about the size
of his wife's shoes. Out of work since June, he relies on the $40 a
day that Mrs. da Silva earns cleaning houses, and he walks the
streets of Sao Paulo desperate for work.


   ``I assumed commitments that I don't have any way of getting out
of,'' da Silva, a former salesman in a building-supply store, said.
``How could I know that in 1998 I'd be stopped dead? Our lives have
turned around more than 800 degrees.''


   As Brazilians prepare to vote on Sunday, polls predict that
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, highly acclaimed for putting
inflation under control, will handily win re-election.


   But behind the voters' preferences is a kaleidoscope of doubts
and difficulties that Brazilians face as their economy grinds to a
virtual halt, and they prepare for the humiliation of ceding some
degree of sovereignty for an expected $30 billion in aid from the
International Monetary Fund.


   The president's closest rival, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, 52, a
union leader from the leftist Workers' Party, opposes the bailout
and says the administration lacks an effective industrial and
employment policy. Polls project that he will take 24 percent of
the vote.


   While presidents and prime ministers, central bankers and
economists debate whether low inflation should be a higher priority
than economic growth, Brazilians ask the same question on a deeply
personal level. After years of failed economic projects and
hyperinflation of more than 200 percent a month just four years
ago, Brazilians see the global future as inevitable, although they
are not sure where they will land in this modern borderless world
of commerce.


   ``The middle of a storm is not the time to change the ship's
captain,'' said Emir Sader, a sociology professor at the University
of Sao Paulo and at the State University of Rio de Janeiro,
explaining the support for Cardoso. ``It doesn't mean the boat is
not sinking, though.''


   Last month Cardoso pledged to push Social Security and tax
overhauls through Congress and to thin the Civil Service rolls. His
plans mirror those that he made four years ago, which were partly
sacrificed because of his crusade for a constitutional amendment
that let him seek re-election.


   The delay in trimming government spending heightened Brazil's
vulnerability to the credit problem that is affecting emerging
markets. The overnight doubling of effective interest rates to more
than 40 percent a year last month has stopped the economy in its
tracks.


   The sudden drain of confidence, vividly illustrated by the
steady exit of $30 billion in foreign reserves since Russia's
collapse last month, raised doubts about the direction of the
economy that Brazilians once thought was doing well.


   Nilton Bonder, a rabbi and the writer of ``The Kabbalah of
Money,'' said he felt as if Brazil had been seduced by
globalization as a first-world nation and had lowered trade
barriers without any strategy to modernize industry.


   As a result, Bonder noted, some companies in once formidable
industries like textiles and toys have slowed production and begun
importing from China, ``doing what's best for the company rather
than what's best for Brazil.'' He said he could not imagine what
Brazil's long-term global role would be.


   Paul Krugman, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, also questioned conventional economic wisdom, wondering
how setting up a country like Brazil for recession, with a steep
increase in interest rates and cutbacks in government services,
could be considered correct.


   ``Structural reform is supposed to help the supply side of the
economy, not be a precondition for increasing demand,'' Krugman
wrote recently. He likened the solutions for saving Japan, South
Korea and other economies in crisis to ``trying to bail out a
sinking ship with teaspoons.''


   As the election approaches, Brazilians have hunkered down as if
for a tidal wave, expecting that the loss of employment, benefits
and government services, combined with the industrial slowdown,
will hit them all at once after Sunday.


   Though nobody has laid out the details of Social Security
changes, pensioners like Nilton Tambara, 54, a retired metalworker,
fear becoming its targets.


   Cardoso had proposed that age rather than the number of years
worked should determine eligibility for retirement. In a famous
gaffe this year he used the word ``bums'' to describe workers who
wanted to retire. Though Cardoso apologized for the remark, workers
like Tambara felt under attack.


   Tambara said he began working at 11 and paid into the Social
Security system for 33 of the 41 years that he had worked before
starting to collect his pension. He said Brazilian men, on average,
lived to 65.


   Although Brazil is the ninth-largest economy in the world,
one-quarter of the adults live on one minimum salary of $110 a
month. Seven of 10 Brazilians who will vote next week have had less
than a primary-level education.


   The distribution of income, among the most skewed in the world,
continues in retirement, when 15 percent of those who collect
Social Security receive 50 percent of the benefits.


   ``Is there any way to stay calm in this country?'' Tambara
asked. ``The categories that the government talks about _ the rich,
the middle class and the poor _ don't exist. It's just the rich and
the miserable.''


   (STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   nn



   WASHINGTON _ As financial leaders from the world's major
economies, as well as from many of the most shell-shocked, gathered
Saturday for talks, the Clinton administration faced unusual
challenges from Europe, Japan and emerging-market nations, which
are all arriving with different and even contradictory strategies
for stabilizing the global economy.


   The clash of approaches, which began to play out as Treasury
Secretary Robert Rubin sat down Saturday morning with Japan's
finance minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, reflects both the extraordinary
tension and the behind-the-scenes power struggles under way as the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank open their annual
meeting here.


   After months of market plunges, currency devaluations, bank
failures and bankruptcies around the globe, governments are
searching desperately for some kind of coordinated approach that
can halt some of the most virulent economic turmoil in half a
century.


   But it will not be easy, officials concede. As the meetings
opened, Miyazawa announced a $30 billion Japanese program to aid
stricken countries throughout Asia. The program includes government
loans, the purchase of bonds issued by Asian nations and guarantees
that private bank loans will be repaid.


   While Southeast Asian countries immediately hailed the move, the
Clinton administration's response was lukewarm. Rubin had said on
Friday, even before the announcement, that Japan's action was
``constructive,'' but that getting its own banks in order and its
huge economy restarted was ``by vast multiples more important.''


   Miyazawa, a former prime minister who has 40 years of experience
dealing with the United States, shot back Saturday that President
Clinton's proposals for new strategies on how the IMF could choke
off crises before they start ``would not be very convincing unless
the United States' commitments to the IMF are lived up to.''


   He was referring to Congress' refusal so far to approve $18
billion in new money for the fund, an issue that Senate and House
conferees will be debating as the meetings go on here this week.


   President Clinton will take the unusual step of participating
directly on Monday in a critical meeting of finance ministers and
central bankers from 22 nations. And on Tuesday he will speak to
the entire IMF, which represents 182 nations, in his second major
speech on the world economy in three weeks.


   Clinton set the urgent tone of the meetings on Friday, when he
declared that the world was on a ``financial precipice.'' But
Clinton, who last spring was resisting advice that he become far
more publicly involved in managing the world's financial chaos,
insisted that it was not too late to act.


   ``We don't have to have a worldwide recession if those of us
that enjoy growth will take the initiative and move now,'' he said
at the White House.


   A dramatic initiative to stop the financial contagion may come
within days as the IMF, the Treasury Department and Brazil's
finance minister, Pedro Malan, put the final touches on a package
of $30 billion or more to stabilize the Brazilian economy.


   Rubin met with Malan at the Treasury late on Friday, and there
was considerable speculation that the package could be announced as
soon as voting is completed on Sunday in Brazil's presidential
election. The vote is expected to result in the re-election of
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso.


   Clinton administration officials say they fear that a financial
meltdown in Brazil would take the rest of Latin America with it,
and bring the crisis to the United States' own borders.


   Nonetheless, the cacophony of competing ideas suggests that it
will be extraordinarily difficult to get nations facing a varied
array of problems _ deep recession and mass unemployment in
Southeast Asia, political paralysis in Russia and Indonesia, huge
bank failures in Japan, an incipient currency crisis in Brazil, but
continued prosperity in Western Europe and the United States _ to
settle on a common agenda.


   (STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   nn


   The United States, for example, is insisting that there be no
backing away from a decade-long move toward freer and more open
financial markets around the world.


   But the Japanese and Southeast Asians are talking about
``capital controls'' that would reimpose government regulation
preventing investors from moving billions in short-term investments
from one country to another with a few taps on the computer
keyboard.


   The French, meanwhile, want to increase the power of the
committee that oversees the IMF, while Russia is threatening to
default on its loans unless it is quickly given billions that the
fund suspended when President Boris Yeltsin fired his team of
economic reformers and violated the terms of his accord for Western
aid.


   A senior IMF official said last month that Russia's threats are
``a form of blackmail, but the enormous turbulence touched off by
the Russian financial debacle in September gives real teeth to
Russia's threats.


   Clinton and Rubin are hoping to craft their own strategies to
calm the financial markets and keep the worst effects of the
recession from hitting U.S. shores, where exports and corporate
profits are already badly affected.


   The most immediate of those strategies would allow the IMF to
launch pre-emptive strikes to bolster the finances of fundamentally
healthy economies where the global economic contagion seems likely
to hit next.


   Currently the fund intervenes with billions in emergency aid
only after disaster strikes and investors are fleeing. But by that
time, the country's currency is already under heavy attack, and
putting together a bailout can cost far more and often involves
austerity measures _ from budget cuts to sky-high interest rates _
that lead to soaring unemployment and political backlash.


   The administration's proposal will first be debated by the Group
of Seven industrial nations and then, if it gathers much support,
by a larger meeting of 22 nations, including most of the major
emerging markets.


   But a senior Japanese official noted Saturday that the
president's plan ``seems aimed mostly at Latin America'' and
probably would ``not meet a lot of enthusiasm in Europe and Asia.''


   Meanwhile the Europeans are debating how to respond to calls
from Washington for a lowering of interest rates, a step Japan and
the United States have already taken _ though with the most modest
of reductions.


   Gordon Brown, Britain's finance minister, hinted late in the
week before last that London may follow suit. But Germany,
traditionally far more concerned about inflation, has declined to
follow suit. The German government is playing an unusually small
role here as its incoming chancellor, Gerhard Schroeder, prepares
to assemble an economic team.


   The Southeast Asian nations _ which only five years ago were the
subject of a much-discussed World Bank study called ``The East
Asian Miracle'' _ arrived here in shock and confusion about what to
do next. The first nation to be hit by trouble, Thailand, is mired
in difficulties, but looks good in comparison with most of the
region's other nations.


   Malaysia is suffering economic turmoil, and Indonesia's economy
is plunging so deeply into recession that the IMF is backing away
from many of its demands on its government.


   ``In my country,'' said one Indonesian during a
question-and-answer period at the opening session of the meetings
here, ``IMF means I'm Finished.''



   RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil _ Brazilian voters appeared to re-elect
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso in the first round of balloting
Sunday, thus maintaining the leadership of a country struggling
against economic crisis.


   In preliminary returns, Cardoso appeared to have defeated Luiz
Inacio Lula da Silva, the three-time presidential candidate of the
leftist Workers Party, with 56 percent of the vote, a far stronger
showing than polls initially predicted.


   Cabinet members gathering at the presidential palace in Brasilia
Sunday night called the vote a mandate for reform, which the
president is under national and international pressure to carry
out.


   With $30 billion having drained from federal reserves since
Russia's economic collapse in late August, and the Sao Paulo stock
market down more than 40 percent this year, the Brazilian
government has been somewhat paralyzed by the approach of
elections. It has been negotiating a bailout with the International
Monetary Fund, but has been unable to show progress on structural
reforms that would cut government expenses over the long term.


   But the waiting is probably not over yet. The size of his
victory strengthens Cardoso's hand for the politically sensitive
social security, civil service and tax overhauls ahead. But,
political analysts said, Congress will probably not convene to
consider painful economic reforms before important gubernatorial
runoffs on Oct. 25.


   With policy-makers at the meetings of the Group of Seven top
industrialized nations and the International Monetary Fund in
Washington seeking permanent solutions to ward off the volatility
that is threatening Brazil after devastating Asia and Russia,
Cardoso is expected to start taking steps to put Brazil's accounts
in order.


   Antonio Carlos Alkimin, a political science professor at
Catholic University and chief of population studies at the
Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics, said he did not
expect that Cardoso could make progress toward restructuring the
government before Oct. 25, because these measures would require
legislative approval.


   ``What he can do is take measures on the administrative level to
cut costs, or to play with controls on currency,'' Alkimin said.


   But Gregg Smith, chief investment strategist at Prudential
Securities, said that financial markets were not expecting concrete
reforms from Brazil in the next few weeks.


   ``The next thing everybody's going to be watching is whether
there is an IMF and World Bank package to support Brazil and
whether the Brazilians are starting to take actions to work on the
budget deficit,'' he said. ``If those two things look like they're
moving in the right direction, it will begin to calm financial
markets.''


   Sunday's balloting was somewhat confused, with about half the
country voting on small shoebox-sized computers that elderly voters
had trouble mastering. Though electioneering was required to end
before polls opened, most candidates appeared to ignore the
prohibition.


   At Rocinha, in Rio de Janeiro, believed to be the largest slum
in South America with about 300,000 residents, palm-sized photos of
candidates fluttered like autumn leaves through the air and
carpeted the streets. People waited more than an hour to cast their
votes, with many supporting Cardoso for re-election.


   Luiz Claudio Silveira, a 34-year-old horse trainer, said he
planned to vote for Cardoso, largely because he ended inflation.
``If you go to the supermarket, you can buy whatever you need
now,'' he said. ``Four years is not enough to change a country as
big as ours. I really believe in him.''


   Rute Vicente Oliveira, a 48-year-old manicurist, also planned to
vote for Cardoso. She said that for most of her life, her family
lived in a lean-to, too poor to build a proper home. It was her
father's dream, she said, and he died before it was realized.
``Now, the house is almost done, it's almost completely in order,''
she said.


   Gilberto Manuel da Silva, 40, who owns an ice cream parlor, said
that he expected the economic adjustments that Cardoso announced
would hurt him personally, but he was prepared to sacrifice in
order to stabilize Brazil's economy.


   ``I'm thinking more about the situation of the country,'' da
Silva said. ``With a stable money, our situation will get better.''



   RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil _ Brazilian voters gave President
Fernando Henrique Cardoso a comfortable lead in the first round of
balloting Sunday, apparently maintaining the leadership of a
country struggling against economic crisis.


   With 22 percent of the vote counted, Cardoso appeared to have
won 51 percent of the vote, compared with 34 percent for his main
rival, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, the three-time presidential
candidate of the leftist Workers Party.


   If he still has a majority when returns are complete, Cardoso
will be declared re-elected without facing a runoff. Exit polls
indicated that he might win as much as 56 percent.


   Cabinet members gathering at the presidential palace in Brasilia
Sunday night called the vote a mandate for the economic measures
that the president is under national and international pressure to
carry out.


   With $30 billion having drained from federal reserves since
Russia's economic collapse in late August, and with the Sao Paulo
stock market down more than 40 percent this year, the Brazilian
government has been close to paralyzed by the approach of the
election.


   It has been negotiating a bailout with the International
Monetary Fund but has been unable to show progress on structural
changes that would cut government expenses over the long term.


   The waiting is probably not over yet, though. The size of his
victory strengthens Cardoso's hand for the politically sensitive
social security, civil service and tax overhauls ahead. But
political analysts said Congress would probably not convene to
consider the painful economic measures before important
gubernatorial runoffs on Oct. 25 because the legislators will be
busy campaigning for their parties' gubernatorial candidates.


   With policy-makers at meetings of the Group of Seven industrial
nations and the International Monetary Fund in Washington seeking
permanent solutions to ward off the volatility that is threatening
Brazil after devastating Asia and Russia, Cardoso is under
considerable pressure to put Brazil's accounts in order.


   But Gregg Smith, chief investment strategist at Prudential
Securities in New York, said the international financial markets
were not necessarily expecting major changes from Brazil in the
next few weeks.


   ``The next thing everybody's going to be watching is whether
there is an IMF and World Bank package to support Brazil, and
whether the Brazilians are starting to take actions to work on the
budget deficit,'' he said. ``If those two things look like they're
moving in the right direction, it will begin to calm financial
markets.''


   Antonio Carlos Alkimin, a political science professor at
Catholic University in Rio de Janeiro and chief of population
studies at the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics,
said he did not expect that Cardoso could make progress toward
restructuring the government before Oct. 25, because such measures
would require legislative approval.


   ``What he can do is take measures on the administrative level to
cut costs or to play with controls on currency,'' Alkimin said.


   Sunday's balloting was somewhat confused, with about half of the
country voting on small shoebox-sized computers that elderly voters
had trouble mastering. Though electioneering was required to end
before polls opened Sunday, most candidates appeared to ignore the
prohibition.


   At Rocinha, in Rio de Janeiro, believed to be the largest slum
in South America with about 300,000 residents, palm-size photos of
candidates fluttered like autumn leaves through the air and
carpeted the streets. People waited more than an hour to cast their
votes, with many supporting Cardoso.


   Luiz Claudio Silveira, 34, a horse trainer who voted in Rocinha,
said he planned to vote for Cardoso, largely because the president
had ended inflation. ``If you go to the supermarket, you can buy
whatever you need now,'' Silveira said. ``Four years is not enough
to change a country as big as ours. I really believe in him.''


   Rute Vicente Oliveira, 48, a manicurist, also planned to vote
for Cardoso. For most of her life, she said, her family lived in a
lean-to, too poor to build a proper home. Her father dreamed of
giving his family solid, sturdy shelter, Ms. Oliveira said, but he
died before concrete blocks replaced the family's plywood slats.


   ``Now the house is almost done,'' she said. ``It's almost
completely in order.''


   Many voters appeared to be unaware of the fiscal adjustments
ahead, though the president announced less than two weeks before
the election that government belt-tightening measures would be
inevitable. Of the 106 million Brazilians eligible to vote Sunday,
nearly 70 percent have less than an elementary school education,
and 35 percent are barely literate.


   Gilberto Manuel da Silva, 40, who owns an ice cream parlor, said
that he expected the economic adjustments to hurt him personally
but that he was prepared to sacrifice to stabilize Brazil's
economy. The president said he would cut government costs, crack
down on tax evaders and, if necessary, raise taxes to increase
revenues.


   ``I'm thinking more about the situation of the country than of
myself,'' da Silva said. ``With a stable money, our situation will
get better.''



   RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil _ Through the anxious weeks leading up to
the national elections here on Sunday, as some $30 billion fled
Brazil despite the doubling of domestic interest rates,
international financial officials watched for the government to
tackle cost-cutting reforms as soon as voting ended.


   But Monday, as official returns indicated President Fernando
Henrique Cardoso was barely squeaking through to re-election and
governors allied to him were locked in runoffs later this month,
the road to reform is looming longer and more complex. Polling
groups and television stations that reported an overwhelming
victory for Cardoso came under severe criticism.


   Though exit polls reported Cardoso taking some 56 percent of the
vote, official tallies Monday afternoon gave him 51 percent, with
56 percent of the votes counted. His nearest rival, Luiz Inacio
Lula da Silva, of the leftist Workers Party, took 34 percent,
substantially higher than the 24 percent polls predicted he would
take. Cardoso's margin was just 1.2 percent higher than needed to
avoid a second round of balloting.


   Ciro Gomes, an up-and-coming former finance minister from the
northeastern state of Ceara, took 11 percent, while Eneas Carneiro,
a nationalist who called for Brazil to build an atom bomb, gained
2.2 percent of the vote. Though voting in Brazil is largely
obligatory, the share of abstentions and invalid votes reached 30
percent.


   Allies of the president did poorly in many of Brazil's most
populous and politically influential states, weakening Cardoso's
hand going into negotiations for reform.


   Though Brazil has not yet submitted a formal request, Brazilian
officials have been in Washington negotiating some form of
assistance from the International Monetary Fund that will likely
total $30 billion or more.


   The country's failure to cut spending in two key areas _ social
security and civil service _ and to simplify and improve tax
collection, makes Brazil heavily dependent on foreign capital at a
time when investors generally are fleeing emerging markets.


   Brazil's budget deficit is exceeding 7 percent of Gross National
Product, and its current account deficit, which includes its
balance of trade as well as debt service and other payments,
constitutes more than 4 percent of GNP. Government cutbacks of $5
billion, and the doubling of interbank loan rates to almost 50
percent, have slowed but not stopped the flight of capital. As of 6
p.m. Monday, some $300 million had left foreign reserve coffers,
and the Sao Paulo stock market was down 4.47 percent.


   Investors appear to be watching for lasting reforms from the
government and for signs that wealthy nations will back Brazil.


   But the political arena remained strangely silent Monday, almost
suspended. By Monday afternoon, Cardoso still had not claimed
victory, and da Silva had not conceded defeat. Sergio Amaral, the
president's spokesman, said Cardoso would wait until official
results were completely tallied before speaking.


   Newspapers in Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo headlined exit polls
showing the president doing vastly better than official tallies
bore out, and in state races, polling institutes by and large
underplayed the strength of leftist candidates, bringing them under
sharp attack.


   ``The nation has watched the most shameful political and
electoral manipulation heard of in recent history,'' said a
statement from the coalition of parties that da Silva represented.
It accused the polling institutes, media, and electoral officials
of conspiring ``to influence public opinion and alter the electoral
will.''


   Mauro Francisco Paulino, director of opinion polls for
Datafolha, one of the main polling services, denied any intentional
manipulation of the results. He predicted the final results would
support the exit polls. While it is illegal to announce exit poll
results while voting is still going on, it is ``traditional'' in
Brazil, he said.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   Brazil's Congress, out campaigning for gubernatorial candidates,
will likely not convene to consider reforms before the end of the
month, however dire the international situation. Cardoso appears to
be planning for a low profile in the coming weeks, with a brief
vacation and a trip to Portugal coming up. He is not expected to
openly campaign for any candidates.


   Maria Dalvo Kinzo, a political scientist at the University of
Sao Paulo, said the only factor that might make pushing reforms
easier for the president this time is the urgency of the crisis.
``There's a consciousness that the crisis is very serious,'' Ms.
Kinzo said.


   But she warned that with the strong showings of leftist
candidates in important state races, and with half the deputies
newcomers to Congress, the president's governing coalition was
appearing more fragmented. ``Now, he's going to have to really
patch together support,'' she said.


   Jose Augusto Guilhermo de Albuquerque, coordinator of the
research center on international relations at the University of Sao
Paulo, agreed. ``His coalition will be larger and less
ideologically committed than the current one,'' Albuquerque said.
Party discipline, customarily half-hearted, will be even weaker in
the new panorama, he added.



   WASHINGTON _ Increasingly angry at what they consider the
lenient treatment that Russia received in its $4.5 billion bailout
by the International Monetary Fund, Latin American officials and
economists warned Monday that the programs being offered to protect
their own countries were too paltry.


   Guillermo Ortiz, Mexico's central bank governor and former
finance minister, said that faced with the mounting financial
pressures on Latin America and the rest of the developing world,
the $90 billion the United States wants to give the monetary fund
in extra lending money would be adequate ``if things go well, but
not enough for a bad scenario.''


   By some calculations, he said, the developing world might need
$200 billion in new loans by 1999.


   Ortiz's warnings came at a seminar here during this year's
annual meeting of the World Bank and the IMF. When Russia defaulted
in August on its huge foreign debts and the United States and other
major powers allowed it to happen, he said, South America's ability
to withstand the global financial crisis was seriously undermined.


   ``Until then we were doing fine,'' he said. ``But everything
changed after Russia.''


   What clearly angered Ortiz and other officials at the seminar
was the strong political and financial backing that the United
States and other major powers gave Russia right up to the moment it
defaulted.


   ``Russia was treated like a member of the Group of Seven,''
Ortiz said, referring to the world's most powerful nations, at
whose behest the monetary fund lent Russia $17 billion. ``It was
unthinkable it could fail,'' he said.


   He added that while Mexico could survive ``a period of market
instability, it must be temporary or the situation will be out of
control.''


   Ortiz said Russia's default made investors around the world wary
of all emerging market countries, including those in Latin America.


   Finance Minister Eduardo Aninat of Chile said: ``It's the
packaging effect. Analysts don't differentiate between regions,
countries or sectors anymore.''


   ``Latin America is being buffeted by external shocks this time,
it is not the source of the shocks,'' said E. Gerald Corrigan of
Goldman Sachs and a former president of the New York Federal
Reserve, alluding to the Mexican peso's collapse in 1995 and the
financial turmoil that it provoked.


   All ministers and officials speaking at the seminar, entitled
``Latin America: a steady ship in troubled waters?'' promised that
their countries would continue the free-market-oriented economic
reforms they have introduced in recent years, selling off
state-owned companies and encouraging private business.


   But they also insisted that the United States, other important
nations and institutions like the World Bank and the IMF must be
ready to help.


   The Brazilian finance minister, Pedro Malan, who was greeted
with cheers when he announced the apparent re-election of President
Fernando Henrique Cardoso, pledged the government to impose painful
new austerity measures to reduce the budget deficit. ``We interpret
the election as a mandate to do what we said we would do,'' he
added.


   He recalled that early in September the finance ministers and
central bank governors of nine Latin American countries had met
with World Bank and IMF officials in Washington and vowed ``to
deepen our reform efforts.''


   In Brazil, consequently, there would be no changes in the
government's exchange rate policy and no resort to controls on
outflows of money even though the country has seen about $30
billion of its reserves drain away since July.


   But he said nothing about the big financial aid package he is
rumored to be negotiating with Washington, the World Bank and the
IMF and which some officials now say could total as much as $60
billion.


   He did evoke the possibility of a serious breakdown in Latin
America's largest economy _ which is bigger than those of South
Korea, Malaysia and Thailand combined _ by saying the world now has
``an historic opportunity to show how by acting together we could
have a successful experience at crisis prevention.''


   So far, Latin American economies have weathered the
international crisis relatively well. The IMF currently expects
them to grow at a rate of 2.8 percent this year and 2.7 percent
next year, down only 0.6 percent and 1.6 percent respectively on
what it predicted last May.


   But international confidence in the region's currencies is
vulnerable to the balance-of-payments deficits that all major Latin
American countries are running. They currently range from 3.6
percent and 4.4 percent of total output respectively for Brazil and
Argentina, to 7 percent in the case of Chile.


   &QL;



   The New York Times said in editorial for Wednesday, Oct. 7:


   Brazilian President Fernando Henrique Cardoso has little time to
savor his apparent first-round re-election victory Sunday. He must
take rapid and unpopular steps to save the economy.


   Brazilians voted for Cardoso because they trusted his economic
management more than that of his main rival, Luiz Inacio Lula da
Silva. da Silva, who leads the Workers Party, campaigned for a more
closed economy. His prescriptions struck many Brazilians as
well-meaning but unrealistic. But Cardoso avoided a runoff by the
smallest of margins, and his allies failed to win in many important
states. The new Congress, which will take office in February, is
likely to be less cooperative than the current one.


   Brazil has made great economic strides under policies initiated
by Cardoso, first as finance minister and then as president.
Inflation, a perennial problem, has fallen from 3,000 percent a
year to around zero. As the economy has grown, many Brazilians have
prospered.


   Much of that success came from a policy of tying the Brazilian
currency, the real, to the dollar, and allowing it to fall about 7
percent a year. Unfortunately, it appears that the depreciation
rate was not enough to keep up with economic realities. Brazil has
been running a large trade deficit as well as a big budget deficit.
Now, with markets fearful, its debts have become crucial. More than
$300 million a day is draining out of the country despite interest
rates of 40 percent, which have stopped economic growth.


   Cardoso and the Congress must take fiscal discipline seriously.
In May the Congress rejected his social security and civil service
reforms. Then he abandoned restraints during his election campaign,
and spending soared. Now Congress must simplify taxes and improve
income tax collection rates _ especially crucial because these
taxes will come from the better-off in a country with one of the
world's most unequal income distributions.


   Brazil must also control spending, especially on pensions for
the bloated public sector. Putting Brazil's finances in order will
be painful, but not as painful as economic collapse.


   The International Monetary Fund should calm investors by coming
up with a bailout to stem the hemorrhage of Brazil's reserves. But
it must be contingent on Brazil's own reforms. It is unlikely,
however, that the international community can find enough money to
support the overvalued real forever. The real will probably
eventually have to be devalued, but it is understandable that
Brazilians, who remember hyperinflation, fear an immediate and
perhaps uncontrolled devaluation.


   The perception now is that Latin America could go the way of
Asia if Brazil sinks, and such perceptions can create their own
problems. There are good reasons for the world to help Brazil, but
Brazil must also deal with its own problems.



   BRASILIA, Brazil _ As a three-man economic team headed for
Washington, and President Fernando Henrique Cardoso flew off to
Portugal, Brazilian government officials put the finishing touches
Friday on an ambitious package to raise $20 billion in revenues
through spending cuts and tax increases next year.


   But public announcement of those measures, eagerly awaited by
investors and markets throughout Latin America, appear set for
delay once again. Details of Brazil's plans to reduce its high
deficits, initially expected to be announced just after Cardoso's
Oct. 5 re-election, and then on Oct. 20, now will likely not be
disclosed before the second round of gubernatorial elections Oct.
25, legislators said.


   Since the economic collapse of Russia in August, investors and
economists have sharpened their focus on Brazil. While President
Clinton lobbied Congress for $18 billion to restock the
International Monetary Fund this week, with an eye toward assisting
Brazil, the team that returned here from the IMF's annual meeting
in Washington earlier this month scoured government accounts for
politically feasible sources of savings and reform.


   Though the country has sped up various receipts the government
is getting for privatizing state entities like the phone system to
replenish foreign reserves, it is losing more than $400 million a
day from central bank coffers. Foreign reserves, which had stood at
$70 billion, are down to $46 billion, with capital flight
surpassing $30 billion despite the government's doubling of
interest rates to more than 40 percent.


   Three senior government officials, Pedro Parente and Amaury Bier
of the Finance Ministry and Altamir Lopes of the central bank, are
scheduled to meet this weekend with IMF officials in Washington to
discuss the government's blueprint for cutbacks and reforms.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   Eager to avoid replaying the contentious and unpopular IMF
accords of the 1980s, Brazilian officials are trying to
disassociate the hardship to come from the IMF. The steps to cut
the budget deficit are being portrayed as measures to rehabilitate
the economic systems. In that way, the administration here hopes to
avoid the humiliation of appearing to bend economic policy to IMF
orders once again.


   The IMF goal corresponds to a 2.5 percent to 3 percent surplus
in Brazil's primary budget account, which covers government
expenses but excludes interest payments on debt. ``It will be
drastic, but we have to deliver that,'' said Demosthenes Madureiro
do Pinho, the director of international relations at the Brazilian
central bank. Higher interest rates on the national debt are
bringing the cost of the debt to 3.5 percent of Brazil's economy,
Pinho said, adding that spending reforms are key to restoring
confidence and, ultimately, lowering interest rates.


   In August, before Russia's economic collapse triggered a swift
and sizable flight of capital from Brazil, the government had
presented a budget for next year with a primary account surplus of
0.92 percent, or $6 billion.


   A senior official at the Planning Ministry, Martus Tavares, says
there is little room for the federal government to reduce its
budget by much more. So the government will depend on tax increases
and savings by states and municipalities to raise the remaining $14
billion.


   The federal government will likely create new taxes, increase
existing ones and consolidate others to raise more revenues, though
economists warn that an expected deepening of the recession in
Brazil bodes ill for tax revenues. Michel Temer, president of the
lower house of Parliament, said in an interview here that Congress
would begin debate on social security reform Nov. 4, and would
begin what promises to be a stormy debate on political reform soon
after.


   The measures being discussed include a 0.1 percent increase on a
special government tax on every check written, to 0.3 percent.
Congress passed the tax in 1996 as a one-year effort to improve the
deteriorating public health system, but the revenue has been used
to offset excess spending in other areas. Last year, the tax
brought in $7 billion. With a 0.1 percent increase, it will likely
bring in another $3 billion, and it would be made permanent.


   The three-year plan of adjustments also relies on states and
municipalities to produce about 30 percent of the projected savings
through legally-mandated spending limits, though states have had a
spotty record in controlling outlays.


   While Cardoso clearly interpreted his victory this month as a
mandate for swift, if painful, reforms, it is by no means clear
that state governors are hearing the same message from voters. In
gubernatorial races in key Brazilian states, Brazilians are
favoring candidates that are not particularly known for austerity.

