
	   THE HAGUE, Netherlands (AP) _ A former Bosnian Muslim prison
guard charged with war crimes against Serb captives should get a
milder sentence because he suffers from mental problems worsened by
the war, his lawyer told a U.N. tribunal Monday.
	   The appeal came during the final phase of the months-long trial
of three Muslims and a Croat accused of atrocities at the Bosnian
government-run Celebici prison camp in 1992.
	   On trial are Hazim Delic, Celebici's deputy commander; Zdravko
Mucic, the camp's former commander; Esad Landzo, a former Celebici
guard; and Zejnil Delalic, who prosecutors claim had overall
responsibility for the camp.
	   All four defendants have pleaded innocent. If convicted, they
face maximum life sentences.
	   Although the three-judge panel at the Yugoslav war crimes
tribunal has not yet reached a verdict in the case, Monday's
hearing allowed lawyers to introduce evidence that could help
judges determine prison terms if the defendants are found guilty.
	   Landzo's lawyer, Cynthia McMurrey, was the first to present her
case, using arguments ranging from Landzo's supposed rehabilitation
to his fragile mental state during the war.
	   An expert witness testified that Landzo has a personality
disorder which was compounded by the trauma of war and eventually
led to diminished mental capacity, meaning he allegedly was unable
to exercise his own free will to disobey orders during the war or
to make decisions on his own.
	   In written arguments, Landzo's lawyers said his sentence _ if he
is convicted _ should not be longer than five years. They also
based their arguments on his age, 25; the fact that he had no
record before Celebici; and his voluntary surrender to the
tribunal.
	   Like all guards at Celebici, Landzo acted under the orders of
superiors in the camp, his lawyers said.
	   In a startling development Monday, Landzo even got some support
from fellow war crimes suspect Goran Jelisic, who is awaiting trial
on separate charges. Jelisic, who calls himself the ``Serb Adolf,''
took the stand and praised Landzo for keeping his cell clean,
giving Jelisic some clothes in jail and playing volleyball with
him.
	   ``He's truly a social person, very communicative and a great
joker,'' Jelisic said of Landzo.
	   Prosecutors have said that Serbs held at the central Bosnia camp
were ``murdered, tortured, raped and beaten.'' A 49-page indictment
alleges that inmates were beaten with steel cables and wooden and
metal bars, burned with heated scissors, wrapped with fuses that
were then lit, and kept in vats of water. At least 14 died.
	   The Celebici trial, which began in March 1997, was expected to
last only several months but has dragged on for 19 months, in part
because the U.N. court has five other trials in progress.
	   Taking up sentencing arguments before a trial has ended is part
of the tribunal's new efforts to streamline and speed up its work.
Lawyers for the other defendants, as well as prosecutors, were also
scheduled to make sentencing arguments this week.
	   (jc/bk)

	   THE HAGUE, Netherlands (AP) _ Yugoslav war crimes tribunal
investigators plan to return to Kosovo and resume their probe of
alleged atrocities in the troubled province, a tribunal official
said Wednesday.
	   Visas that were denied earlier by Yugoslav authorities have now
been issued, Deputy Prosecutor Graham Blewitt told a press
briefing. He did not give details on how many investigators will
return or when.
	   Blewitt declined to speculate on the reason behind Belgrade's
change of heart, nor could he confirm that Yugoslav President
Slobodan Milosevic has explicitly agreed to total compliance with
the U.N. court.
	   In a statement, Judge Gabrielle Kirk McDonald of the United
States, the tribunal's president, welcomed ``in principle'' the
recent agreements aimed at averting military intervention. But
McDonald said she had not yet reviewed them to confirm that they
contained ``explicit provisions and mechanisms'' aimed at ensuring
Belgrade's compliance.
	   However, U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke, speaking on NBC's
``Today'' program, said cooperation with the tribunal was indeed
part of the agreements with Milosevic.
	   ``We had a big argument about the war crimes tribunal,''
Holbrooke said. ``It is embedded in our agreement that he said he
will fully comply with the U.N. resolution and that calls for
(compliance).''
	   Holbrooke said Milosevic had agreed to a doubling of war crimes
tribunal staff in Belgrade and to letting them travel freely in
Kosovo, where the tribunal wants to look into reports of Serb
massacres of ethnic Albanian civilians.
	   The tribunal's chief prosecutor, Louise Arbour of Canada, was at
the United Nations on Wednesday to clarify the scope and impact of
the agreements as they relate to war crimes issues.
	   Blewitt said last week that Belgrade officials had suddenly
begun claiming that the tribunal has no jurisdiction to conduct
investigations in Kosovo.
	   The tribunal, set up by the United Nations in 1993 to prosecute
crimes committed following the breakup of the former Yugoslavia,
has always maintained that it also has jurisdiction in the Kosovo
conflict.
	   Until recently, tribunal staff were allowed to carry out
investigations in the region, examining reports of atrocities by
both sides in the Kosovo conflict.
	   ``Our mandate is quite clear. It is not subject to negotiations
neither by President Milosevic nor Mr. Holbrooke,'' Blewitt said
emphatically.
	   McDonald repeatedly has chastised Belgrade for failing to
surrender indicted war suspects at large in Yugoslavia, in
particular the handover of three men accused of orchestrating the
killings of 260 unarmed people after the fall of Vukovar in 1991.
	   ``The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continues to flout the law
and the will of the international community'' by refusing to turn
over indicted suspects, she said in her statement.
	   (jc/bk)

	   UNITED NATIONS (AP) _ The General Assembly voted Friday to
select three judges to fill a new trial chamber of the Yugoslav war
crimes tribunal, whose caseload could grow with atrocities
committed during the Kosovo conflict.
	   Representatives of the 185-member assembly cast secret ballots,
choosing among nine candidates nominated by their home countries.
The three will rule on cases concerning crimes committed in the
former Yugoslavia. Their terms will end Nov. 16, 2001.
	   None of the original nine candidates emerged from the first
round of balloting with the 94 `yes' votes needed for a majority,
meaning a second round was required. Poland and Ecuador withdrew
their candidates for the second round, narrowing the field down to
seven.
	   The remaining candidates were Mohamed Bennouna of Morocco, David
Anthony Hunt of Australia, Per-Johan Viktor Lindholm of Finland,
Hugo Anibal Llanos Mansilla of Chile, Patrick Lipton Robinson of
Jamaica, Waldo Bandara Srinihal Wadugodapitiya of Sri Lanka and
Peter H. Wilkitzki of Germany.
	   The tribunal, graf 5 pvs

	   THE HAGUE, Netherlands (AP) _ A delegation of U.N. war crimes
investigators and prosecutors plans to visit Kosovo early next
month, officials at the Yugoslav war crimes tribunal said
Wednesday.
	   The team, led by Chief Prosecutor Louise Arbour of Canada and
her deputy, Graham Blewitt of Australia, will investigate reports
of massacres and other atrocities in the troubled Yugoslav
province.
	   Gavin Ruxton, a senior legal adviser in Arbour's office, would
give no details of the alleged war crimes the team would be
investigating.
	   He confirmed that Arbour would leave for Yugoslavia on Nov. 5,
although he added that Yugoslav officials have not yet granted the
team visas to visit the region.
	   Belgrade authorities recently began refusing to issue visas to
tribunal investigators planning to visit the province, where Serb
forces have been engaged in a seven-month crackdown of secessionist
ethnic Albanian rebels.
	   (mc/bk)

	   THE HAGUE, Netherlands (AP) _ Handing the Yugoslav war crimes
tribunal only its third conviction, a Bosnian Serb Thursday pleaded
guilty to 14 murders.
	   Goran Jelisic, 30, faces a maximum life prison term for the
killings. Because he pleaded innocent to a genocide charge he will
still face trial at the U.N. court. Only then will he be officially
convicted of the murders, presiding judge Claude Jorda said.
	   (MORE) 	   

	   SIPITULA, Yugoslavia (AP) _ Three Serbs were wounded after their
cars were raked by gunfire from separatist ethnic Albanians, police
said Wednesday. The violence highlighted Kosovo's continuing
potential for bloodshed despite last month's peace agreement.
	   Serb police at a checkpoint near Sipitula, about 15 kilometers
(nine miles) west of Pristina, said Albanian guerrillas opened fire
on two vehicles from the nearby Belacevac coal mine Tuesday
evening.
	   They said an ensuing gunfight between police and the attackers
lasted an hour.
	   Three miners in the two cars were injured and taken to Pristina
hospital, according to police. The cars, still sitting at the
checkpoint Wednesday morning, had several bullet holes or marks in
the windshields and chassis.
	   Villagers said Serb police began shooting at the village at
about the same time police said the gunfight began. The villagers
said they fled and spent the night in nearby fields or homes of
friends and relatives.
	   A few who returned Wednesday morning said police routinely
attack the village and force them to flee.
	   In the Netherlands, the chief prosecutor of the Yugoslav war
crimes tribunal locked horns with the Yugoslav government over the
tribunal's jurisdiction in Kosovo.
	   Chief Prosecutor Louise Arbour said in The Hague that her court
has been given U.N. authority to investigate war crimes in any part
of Yugoslavia. She was responding to assertions by Yugoslav
government officials that Kosovo is off limits to tribunal
investigations.
	   Arbour said Yugoslav authorities still not have issued visas for
a week-long tribune mission to Belgrade and Kosovo, scheduled to
start Friday.
	   Kosovo is a province of Serbia, the dominant Yugoslav republic.
Ethnic Albanians, who make up 90 percent of the province's
population, overwhelmingly favor independence. The Oct. 12
agreement, wrested from Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic,
suspended a nearly eight-month crackdown in the province that left
hundreds dead _ most of them Albanian civilians _ and hundreds of
thousands others homeless.
	   While the guerrillas were not part of the agreement, they have
grudgingly promised to respect it, if it does not compromise their
goal of independence.
	   Alluding to the police threat to Albanian refugees before the
attack, Kosovo's top ethnic Albanian leader said more needs to be
done to ensure the safety of refugees going back home.
	   Ibrahim Rugova spoke Tuesday after venturing into the
countryside for the first time in nine years.
	   ``We saw huge destruction, but we met many people who have begun
returning,'' he said. ``It's a beginning of the process to return.
But for a more massive return, more safety is needed.''
	   Rugova saw charred and roofless homes during a tour of central
Kosovo. He accompanied U.S. envoy Christopher Hill, who is trying
to persuade the ethnic Albanians to give up their dream of Kosovo's
independence from Serbia and settle for some form of self-rule.
	   As the head of the ethnic Albanians' outlawed government in
Kosovo, Rugova has remained almost exclusively in the capital
Pristina since Serbia stripped the province's autonomy in 1989 and
set up a huge police presence.
	   Sporadic violence by both sides continues, along with
intimidation by Serb police intended to prevent ethnic Albanians
from returning home in some areas.
	   ``We have to give them a deeper sense of security as there is
still fear for some people to get back home,'' Rugova said.
	   The Kosovo Information Center _ reflecting views of the Rugova
camp _ reported Serb shelling of Petrovo, 30 kilometers (about 20
miles) southwest of Pristina on Wednesday.
	   Hill, who is trying to set up negotiations between Albanians and
Serbs on a political agreement to set up a three-year interim
period of self-rule, said a settlement is needed to generate more
confidence and stability.
	   While Yugoslavia maintains it has complied with Western demands
to reduce its forces in Kosovo to levels before the crackdown began
last February, the Kosovo Liberation Army said Tuesday that more
special police and soldiers must go.
	   On Wednesday, they announced they are holding two politicians
from Rugova's party who went missing Oct. 30 in Malisevo, southwest
of Pristina. The two, Jakup Kastrati and Cene Desku, were
conducting an anti-KLA campaign and ``coaxed people to turn in
their arms,'' said a KLA statement printed in the daily Koha
Ditore.
	   Yugoslavia's state news agency, Tanjug, said two ethnic
Albanians were sentenced to two- and three-year prison terms for
being weapons-carrying KLA members.
	   (pvs/ih/kk/gj)

	   SIPITULA, Yugoslavia (AP) _ Three Serbs were wounded after their
cars were raked by gunfire from separatist ethnic Albanians, police
said Wednesday. The violence highlighted Kosovo's continuing
potential for bloodshed despite last month's peace agreement.
	   Serb police at a checkpoint near Sipitula, about 15 kilometers
(nine miles) west of Pristina, said Albanian guerrillas opened fire
on two vehicles from the nearby Belacevac coal mine Tuesday
evening.
	   They said an ensuing gunfight between police and the attackers
lasted an hour.
	   Three miners in the two cars were injured and taken to Pristina
hospital, according to police. The cars, still sitting at the
checkpoint Wednesday morning, had several bullet holes or marks in
the windshields and chassis.
	   Villagers said Serb police began shooting at the village at
about the same time police said the gunfight began. The villagers
said they fled and spent the night in nearby fields or homes of
friends and relatives.
	   A few who returned Wednesday morning said police routinely
attack the village and force them to flee.
	   In the Netherlands, the chief prosecutor of the Yugoslav war
crimes tribunal locked horns with the Yugoslav government over the
tribunal's jurisdiction in Kosovo.
	   Chief Prosecutor Louise Arbour said in The Hague that her court
has been given U.N. authority to investigate war crimes in any part
of Yugoslavia. She was responding to assertions by Yugoslav
government officials that Kosovo is off limits to tribunal
investigations.
	   Arbour said Yugoslav authorities still not have issued visas for
a week-long tribune mission to Belgrade and Kosovo, scheduled to
start Friday.
	   Kosovo is a province of Serbia, the dominant Yugoslav republic.
Ethnic Albanians, who make up 90 percent of the province's
population, overwhelmingly favor independence. The Oct. 12
agreement, wrested from Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic,
suspended a nearly eight-month crackdown in the province that left
hundreds dead _ most of them Albanian civilians _ and hundreds of
thousands others homeless.
	   While the guerrillas were not part of the agreement, they have
grudgingly promised to respect it, if it does not compromise their
goal of independence.
	   Alluding to the police threat to Albanian refugees before the
attack, Kosovo's top ethnic Albanian leader said more needs to be
done to ensure the safety of refugees going back home.
	   Ibrahim Rugova spoke Tuesday after venturing into the
countryside for the first time in nine years.
	   ``We saw huge destruction, but we met many people who have begun
returning,'' he said. ``It's a beginning of the process to return.
But for a more massive return, more safety is needed.''
	   Rugova saw charred and roofless homes during a tour of central
Kosovo. He accompanied U.S. envoy Christopher Hill, who is trying
to persuade the ethnic Albanians to give up their dream of Kosovo's
independence from Serbia and settle for some form of self-rule.
	   As the head of the ethnic Albanians' outlawed government in
Kosovo, Rugova has remained almost exclusively in the capital
Pristina since Serbia stripped the province's autonomy in 1989 and
set up a huge police presence.
	   Sporadic violence by both sides continues, along with
intimidation by Serb police intended to prevent ethnic Albanians
from returning home in some areas.
	   ``We have to give them a deeper sense of security as there is
still fear for some people to get back home,'' Rugova said.
	   The Kosovo Information Center _ reflecting views of the Rugova
camp _ reported Serb shelling of Petrovo, 30 kilometers (about 20
miles) southwest of Pristina on Wednesday. The Serbian Media Center
said ``Albanian terrorists'' attacking Serb police were to blame
for the violence at the village.
	   While Yugoslavia maintains it has complied with Western demands
to reduce its forces in Kosovo to levels before the crackdown began
last February, the Kosovo Liberation Army said Tuesday that more
special police and soldiers must go.
	   On Wednesday, they announced they are holding two politicians
from Rugova's party who went missing Oct. 30 in Malisevo, southwest
of Pristina. The two, Jakup Kastrati and Cene Desku, were
conducting an anti-KLA campaign and ``coaxed people to turn in
their arms,'' said a KLA statement printed in the daily Koha
Ditore.
	   Yugoslavia's state news agency, Tanjug, said two ethnic
Albanians were sentenced to two- and three-year prison terms for
being weapons-carrying KLA members.
	   (pvs/ih/kk/gj)

	   THE HAGUE, Netherlands (AP) _ The president of the U.N. war
crimes tribunal angrily branded Yugoslavia a ``rogue state''
Thursday after Belgrade refused to allow investigators to probe
alleged atrocities in Kosovo.
	   Authorities in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia confirmed they
would not allow Louise Arbour, chief prosecutor of the Yugoslav war
crimes tribunal, and a team of investigators to carry out
investigations in the troubled region.
	   ``This conduct is a further example of the FRY's utter disregard
for the norms of the international community,'' said tribunal
president Gabrielle Kirk McDonald of the United States.
	   ``Essentially, it has become a rogue state, one that holds the
international rule of law in contempt,'' she said.
	   Arbour would not say what her next step would be. She said her
visa request was a matter of courtesy and that she has a legal
right to carry out investigations throughout the former Yugoslavia.
	   Arbour had asked for visas for herself and 11 members of her
staff so that they could conduct on-site investigations and
interview witnesses. She vowed to continue investigating ``using
all means available to us,'' but did not elaborate.
	   Hundreds have been killed and hundreds of thousands made
homeless in seven months of fighting between Serb forces and
secessionist ethnic Albanian rebels in the southern Yugoslav
province of Kosovo. U.N. investigators want to check reports of
atrocities on both sides.
	   Kirk McDonald said she would report the non-issuance of visas to
the Security Council, which set up the tribunal in 1993, and urge
it to take ``forceful'' action to force Belgrade into line.
	   ``In the final analysis, it is clear to me that I have an
obligation, now that the prosecutor has reported non-compliance, to
bring this matter to the Security Council,'' Kirk McDonald said.
	   She said Belgrade's defiance of the tribunal amounted to ``a
challenge to the authority of the Security Council'' which has
ordered a tribunal investigation of alleged atrocities in Kosovo
and told Yugoslav authorities to cooperate.
	   The visa holdup prompted Kirk McDonald, of Texas, to cancel a
planned visit to Belgrade to speak to a conference on war crimes
trials.
	   ``This move by the Yugoslav government will have serious legal
consequences,'' said Natasa Kandic, chairwoman of the Humanitarian
Law Center organizing the conference.
	   ``With it, the Yugoslav government acted directly contrary to
the U.N. Security Council Resolution demanding free access to
international investigators to Kosovo,'' she said. ``Relations
between the tribunal and authorities here have now become strained
in the extreme.''
	   (mc/bk)

	   BELGRADE, Yugoslavia (AP) _ Yugoslavia must cooperate with a
U.N. war crimes panel investigating allegations of atrocities in
the rebellious Yugoslav province of Kosovo, a U.S. official said
Saturday.
	   ``In the U.N. Security Council, there is unanimous consent of
all its members that investigators ... have full authority to do
their job in Kosovo,'' said David Scheffer, the State Department's
war crimes envoy at a panel discussion held in Belgrade.
	   President Slobodan Milosevic has defied international pressure
to allow prosecutors from the Netherlands-based tribunal to enter
Kosovo, where hundreds have died in fighting that erupted in
Februrary between separatist ethnic Albanians and Yugoslav forces.
	   Tribunal investigators have said they want to look into claims
on atrocities on both sides.
	   Speaking at the round-table discussion organized by the
Belgrade-based nongovernmental Humanitarian Law Center, Scheffer
said there were reasons to believe that ``serious violations of
international law'' were committed in Kosovo.
	   Tribunal Chief Prosecutor Louise Arbour and a team of
investigators planned a weeklong mission in Kosovo to begin last
Wednesday but were refused visas.
	   Arbour and Scheffer have threatened Yugoslavia with U.N.
sanctions if the authorities continue to defy demands for unlimited
access.
	   ``Since February this year, between 600 and 1,000 people died in
Kosovo, many more were wounded,'' Scheffer said.
	   The tribunal maintains it has a legal right to carry out
investigations throughout Yugoslavia.
	   The wars in the former Yugoslav republics prompted the Security
Council to create the tribunal in 1993 with a mandate to prosecute
breaches of international humanitarian law committed anywhere in
the former Yugoslavia since 1991. Kosovo is in southern Serbia, the
largest of Yugoslavia's two remaining republics.


   GOLUBOVAC, Yugoslavia _ A 42-year-old man who says he is the
lone survivor of a massacre in which 13 ethnic Albanians were
summarily shot and killed in this village in Kosovo recalled
Thursday how he was herded into a garden with other men and told to
lie flat on the ground.


   Heads to the fence, feet toward the house! Serbian policemen
barked, he recounted.


   Then, the severely wounded man said as he recounted the tale
from his mattress on the floor of his home Thursday, police kicked
the prone men with their boots and beat them with the wooden
handles of shovels.


   ``They kept yelling, `Who among you is Kosovo Liberation Army?
If you tell us, we will release everyone else,''' the man recalled
of the events of last Saturday.


   Then, he said, the shooting started. First, the man to his right
was shot, then two men farther down the row. And then the whole row
from left to right, then down the row again, from right to left.


   ``After the two shots for each man, they kicked one, and he was
alive.'' he said. ``They shot him again. When they kicked me, I
didn't move.''


   The survivor, the father of eight children, was advised by
Western diplomats who interviewed him on Tuesday and by a
researcher for Human Rights Watch who saw him Thursday not to give
his name to a reporter for fear of jeopardizing his safety.


   The diplomats and the researcher for the New York-based rights
organization said the man could suffer reprisals from Serbian
policemen who are at checkpoints on the roads and in the hills
around the village if he revealed his identity.


   But they said that because of the clarity and first-hand nature
of the man's evidence, they consider him a key potential witness
for a proceeding at the international war crimes tribunal in The
Hague.


   The killing of the men and the massacre of 18 members of an
Albanian family on the same day in villages about four miles apart
in the Drenica region of Kosovo, a province where guerrillas are
fighting for independence from Serbia, prompted calls from Western
leaders for war-crimes investigations by The Hague tribunal.


   Washington called on the government of the Yugoslav president,
Slobodan Milosevic, to allow impartial forensic experts to visit
the sites to determine what happened. The Milosevic government has
denounced the war crimes tribunal and consistently denied access to
forensic experts, asserting that there was no need for them because
no war crimes had occurred.


   Two investigators from the war crimes tribunal who have been in
Kosovo for a week were expected to see the survivor Thursday. But
the investigators who got into Kosovo, after long negotiations with
the Yugoslavia government for their visas, left for Belgrade, the
capital, Thursday without interviewing the survivor or inspecting
the site where the Deliaj family was massacred.


   A spokesman at The Hague, Jim Landale, said he had no
information on why the investigators left before pursuing the two
cases. ``We are confirming that we are investigating these
incidents,'' he said.


   The researcher for Human Rights Watch, Peter Bouckaert, who has
experience in interviewing survivors of atrocities in Africa, said
after listening to the man's account that the coherence of his
story and his lack of exaggeration made him an important witness
for the tribunal. Significantly, he said, details of the story
tallied with evidence in the garden of spent bullets from an
automatic weapon and pools of blood along the fence.


   The executive director of Human Rights Watch, Kenneth Roth, said
in New York Thursday that it was troubling that the tribunal had
not seized the opportunity to listen to the survivor or inspect the
two killing sites. ``This is not a historical inquiry,'' Roth said
of the tribunal.


   The survivor, who has a shock of black hair and full black
mustache, has essentially been a captive in his house since he
hobbled the half-mile back home Saturday afternoon. He is too
frightened to go to the hospital even though his leg wound reaches
to the bone and gangrene is starting to develop. His left arm is
also wounded from the second bullet.


   The International Committee for the Red Cross visited him on
Tuesday with some bandages and medicines but has not been back
since, he said.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   The man described the events leading up to the shootings as the
climax of a Serbian attack on the village that began last Friday
morning with shelling from across the hills. Men, women and
children fled to the forest and spent the night under the trees.


   On Saturday morning, he said, everyone was ordered by Serbian
forces to come out of the forest and gather in a field. The women
and children were separated from the men, and then the men were
whittled down into a smaller group.


   There were about ``30 to 40 police'' doing the sorting of the
men, he said. They wore the blue camouflage uniforms of the Serbian
security police, and some had yellow insignia on their shoulders
signifying rank, he said. Some wore black bandannas around their
foreheads.


   Asked if there was one person in charge, he said: ``I don't
know. They were all speaking.'' Toward the end of the selection,
one policeman was making the choices, he said.


   The final group of men were ordered to walk about half a mile
from the field to a dirt road at a spot just outside the garden of
the house where the killings occurred. They were told to kneel with
their heads down to the ground, he said. They were kept there about
two hours, he said.


   They were then forced to walk through the wide wooden gate of
the garden and lie on their stomachs with their hands held behind
their necks.


   When the beating with the shovels started, the victims began to
scream, he said. Those who turned their faces to the policemen were
beaten much more, he said. ``I was screaming and shouting, but I
didn't turn my face, only once.''


   The man said that after a while, ``somebody new came to the
garden.''


   He presumed, he said, that it was the ``new'' policeman who did
the firing. A diplomat who interviewed him on Tuesday said he
understood from the man's account that one or more policemen did
the shooting.


   ``We were executed one by one,'' he said. ``Some were begging to
be released. Nobody tried to get up.'' The clatter was that of an
automatic weapon, he said.


   Suddenly silence fell, he said. He could hear the policemen
leave the garden and then depart the village with a burst of
machine-gun fire.


   A builder by trade, the man said his brother was one of the 13
who was shot to death. His brother's body was brought home along
the same route he had used to escape.


   The survivor's face crumpled slightly when he was asked if he
would testify at The Hague. He was most afraid, he said, for the
safety of his wife and children, who would most likely become
targets of Serbian revenge.

