
	   GROZNY, Russia (AP) _ Unknown gunmen abducted three Britons and
a New Zealand citizen in Russia's breakaway Chechnya region after a
shootout with their bodyguards, a regional official said Sunday.
	   The four men, who were in Chechnya to install a cellular phone
system, were taken hostage Saturday after 20 men in camouflage
attacked the house where they lived in the Chechen capital Grozny,
said Shadid Bargishev, head of the regional anti-kidnapping
department.
	   The British Foreign Office initially said the four were seized
early Sunday morning, but later said the kidnapping had taken place
at 4 a.m. Saturday. It appealed to Russian authorities ``for their
cooperation for the safe and early return of the men.''
	   One bodyguard and an unknown number of attackers were wounded in
the fire fight, the Interfax news agency said. Police were
searching regional hospitals for anyone coming in with gunshot
wounds.
	   The British Embassy in Moscow identified the four hostages as
Britons Peter William Kennedy, Darren Eamonn Hickey, and Rudolf
Franz-Joseph Petschi, and Stanley Frederick James Shaw of New
Zealand. They were working for Granger Telecom, a British firm
based in Waybridge, Surrey, that has been working with the Chechen
telecommunications company, an embassy spokesman said.
	   The kidnappers have not set conditions for the men's release,
the spokesman said.
	   The kidnapping took place only 500 meters (550 yards) from the
anti-kidnapping department, Interfax said. Policemen heard the
shots, but didn't react because gunfire is frequent in the evening
in Grozny, the report said.
	   ``Despite the fact that the government of Britain did not
recommend that its citizens visit Chechnya, these four came and did
not inform anybody about their presence, not even law enforcement
bodies,'' Bargishev said.
	   The British Foreign Office said that Britons have been advised
not to go to Chechnya for the last 4 1/2 years.
	   The incident ``will seriously slow down the plan for Chechnya's
revival,'' said Leon Wascinski, head of the Chechen mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, according to
Interfax.
	   The kidnappers ``whoever they are, are acting in defiance of the
interests of the Chechen people and are doing so deliberately,'' he
said.
	   The kidnapping came just two weeks after Chechen warlords
released two British charity workers, ending the pair's 14 months
of captivity in the turbulent republic in Russia's northern
Caucasus region.
	   Hundreds of Russian and foreign citizens have been abducted by
gangs seeking ransom since the 1994-1996 independence war with
Russia, and dozens remain held.
	   Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov's government has been unable
to stem kidnappings that have become a steady business for some
criminal gangs.
	   Chechnya considers itself independent and has been running its
own affairs since Russian troops left two years ago. Moscow says
that Chechnya remains part of Russia but has no control over its
affairs.
	   (pvs/lon/ji) 	   

	   LONDON (AP) _ A Foreign Office minister said Monday that the
British phone company whose four employees were kidnapped in
Chechnya at the weekend was specifically warned to withdraw from
Russia's breakaway region, but ignored the advice.
	   ``The advice could not have been clearer, the risks were known
to the company and to the employees,'' said Foreign Office Minister
Derek Fatchett in a British Broadcasting Corp. radio interview.
``The fact that they ignored that advice is a decision they took
themselves and is their responsibility ... It's a mature world and
people have to take mature decisions.''
	   The company, Granger Telecom, said it knew Chechnya was probably
the world's most dangerous place for kidnapping but thought its
staff would be well-protected because they were working on a
government contract to install a telecommunications system.
	   Three of the kidnaped men, Britons Darren Hickey and Rudolph
Petschi and New Zealander Stanley Shaw, worked for Granger. The
British company said the fourth hostage, Briton Peter Kennedy, may
have been employed directly by Chechen Telecom, which has offered a
reward for information about the kidnapping.
	   The men were seized early Saturday after a shoot-out with their
bodyguards. There was no word on any ransom demand for the four
men.
	   ``We had a general advice from the Foreign Office about visits
to Chechnya but no specific advice about us,'' Granger Telecom
chief executive Ray Verth told the BBC.
	   Verth, who has now suspended operations in Chechnya, said the
company had considered the contract, worth several million dollars,
justified the risk. The company was 12 months into a five-year
contract to install 300,000 telephone lines across Chechnya.
	   Hickey had been in the region since early August and was due
back in Britain this week, said Verth. Shaw had been in Chechnya
only a week and Petschi for 2 1/2 weeks.
	   ``None of our employees were forced to go, they voluntarily went
_ they knew the risks,'' said Verth. ``We understood and believed
they were well catered for because we were contracted with the
Chechen government and Chechen Telecom, who guaranteed our safety,
which obviously has not occurred.''
	   Fatchett said Britain would do all it could to get the men
released.
	   Hickey's sister said Monday his family is devastated. ``He was
just out there doing a job to help the country get their
communications back,'' said a tearful Deborah Hickey, 21.
	   Hickey, who is single and lives with his parents at Thames
Ditton, south of London, had been to Chechnya twice before, she
said, ``and he thought there was no danger at all,'' despite having
heard gunfire on a previous trip _ ``he said that was part of it.''
	   She did not blame Granger. ``Darren is old enough to make his
own decision to go out there or not,'' she said.
	   The Russian news agency ITAR-Tass on Monday quoted Magomed
Magomadov, Chechen deputy procurator-general, as saying one of the
kidnappers was wounded and received treatment at the district
hospital in Urus-Martan.
	   The men were seized just two weeks after Chechen warlords
released two British charity workers who had been held for 14
months.
	   London's Guardian newspaper said Monday that the latest
kidnappings ``cast fresh doubt on Foreign Office claims to have
paid no ransom'' to secure the release of the charity workers.
	   (mj-scl)

	   MOSCOW (AP) _ The British Embassy in Moscow has received no
direct information about three Britons and a New Zealander
kidnapped in breakaway Chechnya nearly two weeks ago, an embassy
official said Wednesday.
	   No ransom demands have been made for the hostages, said an
embassy spokeswoman, speaking on the customary condition of
anonymity.
	   The hostages _ Britons Peter Kennedy, Darren Hickey, and Rudolf
Petschi, and New Zealand's Stanley Shaw _ were kidnapped on Oct. 3.
They were working for Granger Telecom, a British telephone company,
installing 300,000 telephone lines across Chechnya.
	   Chechnya's security forces launched a 10-day crackdown last
week, seeking to capture rebel armed groups and possibly find leads
to the hostages.
	   A particularly thorough search was being conducted in Chechnya's
mountainous regions, where hostages are usually held. No trace of
the Britons and the New Zealander have been found, Chechen
officials have said.
	   Hostage-takings, usually for ransom, have become common in
Chechnya since the end of its two-year war for independence from
Russia in 1996.
	   Since the beginning of 1998, 176 people have been kidnapped in
the North Caucasus region of Russia, including dozens of
foreigners, and 90 of them released, officials have said, according
to the Interfax news agency.
	   Another high-profile hostage, Russian presidential envoy
Valentin Vlasov, who was kidnapped on May 1, remains missing.
	   (ad/ls) 	   

	   MOSCOW (AP) _ A bomb exploded in a car carrying a senior Muslim
cleric in breakaway Chechnya on Thursday, but he was not hurt,
Russian news agencies reported.
	   Mufti Akhmad Khadzhi Kadirov was approaching his home in the
Chechen capital of Grozny when the bomb went off under his Mercedes
600, wounding his driver, ITAR-Tass and Interfax reported.
	   Kadirov and his bodyguard managed to scramble out of the burning
car after the blast, which also destroyed a small building and blew
out windows nearby.
	   The attack came one day after a similar car bomb killed
Chechnya's top anti-kidnapping official, Shadid Bargishev.
	   Anti-kidnapping officials blamed the attack on Bargishev's
promise to launch an all-out offensive against hostage-takers, and
his recent success in securing the release of several captives,
including a British couple and 24 Russian soldiers.
	   ``The accident is a result of the work of the (anti-kidnapping)
department,'' said Husein Zabrailov, an investigator who worked
with Bargishev.
	   Chechnya's first deputy security minister, Abu Movsayev, said
that the Russian military may have been behind the killing.
Bargishev had recently challenged a claim by the Russian prosecutor
general's office that it had freed the Russian servicemen from
captivity, Movsayev said.
	   Meanwhile, the Interior Ministry in the southern Russian region
of Dagestan offered Monday to help combat hostage-taking in
neighboring Chechnya after the attack on Bargishev, ITAR-Tass said,
citing the ministry's press center.
	   Chechnya, where rebels fought a bloody independence war against
Russia in 1994-96, conducts its own affairs and has seen a sharp
rise in violent crime and hostage-taking, usually by criminal gangs
for ransom.
	   Dagestan suffers from its own ethnic conflicts, and has also
been hit by spillover violence and kidnappings by armed gangs in
Chechnya.
	   More than 100 people are still being held captive in Chechnya,
including three Britons, a New Zealander and a Turk, according to
Interfax.
	   (pvs/nw/ls) 	   

	   GROZNY, Russia (AP) _ Chechen officials said the bodies of four
kidnapped foreigners had been found Tuesday near a remote village.
	   But an Associated Press reporter saw four severed heads near the
village of Assinovskaya, about 40 kms (25 miles) west of Grozny,
the Chechen capital.
	   The heads were identified as those of the four foreigners by
Umar Makhauri, who had been a bodyguard assigned to the four when
they were abducted Oct. 3 by unidentified gunmen in Grozny. He said
the bodies had not been found.
	   One New Zealand and three British engineers were kidnapped.
	   Chechen government officials at the scene refused to comment.
	   Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov said the bodies of four men
had been recovered. There was no immediate explanation for the
discrepencies.
	   Kidnapping of foreigners for ransom is rampant in Chechnya, a
lawless region in southern Russia. But victims are rarely killed.
	   (ren)

	   GROZNY, Russia (AP) _ Chechen authorities found the remains of
four kidnapped foreigners Tuesday near a remote village in the
breakaway region in southern Russia.
	   An Associated Press reporter saw four severed heads near the
village of Assinovskaya, about 40 kms (25 miles) west of Grozny,
the Chechen capital. There was no sign of any bodies.
	   The heads were identified as those of the four foreigners by
Umar Makhauri, who had been a bodyguard assigned to the four when
they were abducted Oct. 3 by unidentified gunmen in Grozny. He said
the bodies had not been found.
	   Chechen government officials at the scene refused to comment.
	   Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov said the bodies of four men
had been recovered, but gave no further details.
	   The hostages _ Britons Peter Kennedy, Darren Hickey, and Rudolf
Petschi, and New Zealand's Stanley Shaw _ were kidnapped on Oct. 3.
They were working for Granger Telecom, a British telephone company,
installing 300,000 telephone lines across Chechnya.
	   Chechen authorities had been searching for the missing men for
the past two months. British officials said they had not received
any ransom demand for the missing men.
	   Hostage-takings, usually for ransom, have become common in
Chechnya since the end of the breakaway republic's two-year war for
independence from Russia in 1996. But victims are rarely killed.
	   Since the beginning of 1998, 176 people have been kidnapped in
the North Caucasus region of Russia, including dozens of
foreigners, and 90 of them released, officials have said.
	   (ren/ml)

	   GROZNY, Russia (AP) _ Chechen authorities found the remains of
four kidnapped foreigners Tuesday near a remote village in the
breakaway region in southern Russia.
	   An Associated Press reporter saw four severed heads near the
village of Assinovskaya, about 40 kms (25 miles) west of Grozny,
the Chechen capital. There was no sign of any bodies.
	   The heads were identified as those of the four foreigners by
Umar Makhauri, who had been a bodyguard assigned to the four when
they were abducted Oct. 3 by unidentified gunmen in Grozny. He said
the bodies had not been found.
	   Chechen government officials at the scene refused to comment.
	   Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov said the bodies of four men
had been recovered, but gave no further details.
	   The hostages _ Britons Peter Kennedy, Darren Hickey, and Rudolf
Petschi, and New Zealand's Stanley Shaw _ were kidnapped on Oct. 3.
They were working for Granger Telecom, a British telephone company,
installing 300,000 telephone lines across Chechnya.
	   Chechen authorities had been searching for the missing men for
the past two months. British officials said they had not received
any ransom demand for the missing men.
	   Hostage-takings, usually for ransom, have become common in
Chechnya since the end of the breakaway republic's two-year war for
independence from Russia in 1996. But victims are rarely killed.
	   Since the beginning of 1998, 176 people have been kidnapped in
the North Caucasus region of Russia, including dozens of
foreigners, and 90 of them released, officials have said.
	   (ren/ml)

	   GROZNY, Russia (AP) _ Chechen authorities found the decapitated
heads of four kidnapped foreigners Tuesday near a remote village
after a two-month search in the breakaway region in southern
Russia.
	   An Associated Press reporter saw the severed heads near the
village of Assinovskaya, about 40 kilometers (25 miles) west of
Grozny, the Chechen capital. He did not see any sign of the bodies.
	   The heads were identified as those of the four abducted
foreigners by Umar Makhauri, who had been a bodyguard assigned to
the four when they were abducted Oct. 3 by unidentified gunmen in
Grozny. He said the bodies had not been found.
	   But Chechen government officials at the scene said four bodies
had been found without giving further details. Chechen President
Aslan Maskhadov said in Grozny that the bodies of four men had been
recovered.
	   The hostages _ Britons Peter Kennedy, Darren Hickey, and Rudolf
Petschi, and New Zealand's Stanley Shaw _ were engineers. They were
working for Granger Telecom, a British telephone company,
installing 300,000 telephone lines across Chechnya.
	   Maskhadov said Chechen officials had caught one of the captors
Monday and he told police where the hostages were being held. But
that information reached the other captors, who decided to kill
their captives, the ITAR-Tass news agency quoted Maskhadov as
saying.
	   The chief executive of Granger Telecom, Ray Verth, said Tuesday
that Chechen authorities had mounted a rescue attempt Monday night
that went ``tragically wrong.'' No other details were available.
	   He said the company had ``opened a dialogue with the kidnappers
and received confirmation that the hostages were alive as recently
as last week.''
	   ``Their murder is an appalling and barbaric act and our thoughts
go out to the families to whom we offer our deepest condolences. We
are a small tightly-knit company and everyone here is in a state of
shock,'' Verth said outside company headquarters in Weybridge,
south of London, where flags were flying at half-mast.
	   Spokesmen at the British and New Zealand embassies in Moscow
said they were checking on reports the four men had been killed,
but could not comment. The British Foreign Ministry in London said
it was investigating urgently reports that bodies had been found.
	   Chechen acting First Vice Premier Turpal Atgeriyev, who is
heading the investigation into the killings, said authorities had
several suspects in the abduction, but have failed to make any
progress, according to the ITAR-Tass news agency.
	   Eamon Hickey, the father of one of the missing men, said he
heard the news and was hoping it would not be confirmed.
	   ``There is so much rumor and counter-rumor coming from out there
that we don't know what to think. Obviously we are hoping and
praying that it does not turn out to be true,'' he said at his home
in England.
	   Chechen authorities had been searching for the missing men for
the past two months. British officials said they had not received
any ransom demand for the missing men.
	   Maskhadov said the deaths of the four men were a major blow to
Chechnya and its efforts to gain international recognition of its
independence. He blamed the rash of abductions in Chechnya to
unidentified ``outside forces'' and their Chechen henchmen.
	   ``I am ready to answer before my people and the whole world for
what happened,'' he was quoted as saying by the Interfax news
agency.
	   Hostage-takings, usually for ransom, have become common in
Chechnya since the end of the breakaway republic's two-year war for
independence from Russia in 1996. But victims are rarely killed.
	   Since the beginning of 1998, 176 people have been kidnapped in
the North Caucasus region of Russia, including dozens of
foreigners, and 90 of them released, officials have said.
	   (ren/ml/adc)


   MOSCOW _ The severed heads of four kidnapping victims _
identified as three Britons and a New Zealander _ were found
Tuesday on the side of a road in Chechnya, the breakaway region on
Russia's southern border that emerged undefeated from a brutal war
two years ago only to be engulfed by a wave of kidnappings and
crime.


   The gruesome killings heightened alarm and outrage about the
volatile situation in the region, which spun out of Moscow's
control long ago. Until now, local kidnappers have usually kept
their hostages alive in hopes of receiving ransom money, which has
become a major source of income in an economy devastated by
Russia's 21-month war against Chechen secessionists.


   Although the corpses have not yet been found, Chechen officials
said Tuesday that they had been able to identify the victims as
four employees of a British telecommunications company. They were
kidnapped from their house in the Chechen capital, Grozny, by two
dozen armed men on Oct. 3, after a shootout with their bodyguards.


   The British government, in a statement Tuesday night condemning
the ``repugnant murders,'' said it was awaiting final confirmation
of the victims' identity.


   ``It is a horrifying crime, committed against the international
community,'' said Manolis Chikhkiyev, an aide to Ruslan Aushev,
president of Ingushetia, a region that borders Chechnya. ``Ordinary
criminals wouldn't kill their hostages, which means that this
situation is much deeper and more complex.''


   An estimated 100 kidnap victims _ including several foreigners,
as well as Russian servicemen _ are still being held in Chechnya
and neighboring regions in the northern Caucasus. In neighboring
Dagestan, kidnappers seized Herbert Gregg, an American teacher, on
Nov. 12 as he was leaving a local orphanage. His whereabouts are
unknown.


   In recent months, the Chechen government has mounted a new
campaign to crack down on the kidnapping gangs, an effort that was
set back in October by a car bomb that killed the leader of its
special anti-terrorist squad.


   The Chechen president, Aslan Maskhadov, has accused his
political opposition and ``foreign agents'' of using kidnapping as
a weapon in its campaign to unseat him. But the crime wave is also
attributed to competing local chieftans, Muslim extremists and
other groups that have been feeding off the lawlessness and anarchy
that has swept the region.


   Last October, a Russian official, Akmal Saidov, was found
strangled to death several days after he had been abducted. The
motive was judged to be political after a note signed by the
``wolves of Islam'' was reportedly found on his body, vowing death
to those who work for the Russian secret service.


   Fear of kidnapping has left Chechnya isolated from the rest of
the world, as journalists, aid workers and foreign investors keep a
wary distance from a region now so impoverished that according to
one local resident, some people are reduced to a diet of animal
feed.


   Yelena Masyuk, one of three Russian television journalist
kidnapped and then released last year after payment of $2 million
in ransom, said at an international conference last May that the
kidnappings had cost Chechnya the sympathy it had won when Russian
troops were bombing its capital and killing its civilians.


   ``Chechens made $16 million on journalists last year, but they
lost much more,'' she said. ``They lost the journalists' confidence
that they had had during the war.'' The result, she said, was ``an
information blockade'' against the region and its 1 million
inhabitants.


   In the meantime, the Russian government, while refusing to
recognize Chechen independence, has virtually no authority in the
region, and has dispersed little of the money it pledged for
postwar reconstruction.


   There have been successes in the war against the kidnappers _
such as the release last month of President Boris Yeltsin's
personal envoy to the region, Valentin Vlasov, after six months of
captivity.


   In the last two months, 55 Russian servicemen who had been held
captive have been returned to Moscow. And in September, a pair of
British aid workers were flown back to England, where they told
harrowing tales of abuse by their captors.


   Most released hostages have reported that their captors were
careful to keep them alive, if barely, so as to be able to collect
their reward. One hostage, released this year after several months
of captivity and speaking on condition of anonymity, described
being held in cold, wet basements, wearing the same set of clothes
until they rotted on his body.


   Masked guards would deliver meager food rations at irregular
intervals, and periodically move their prisoners to different
locations, always at night. In his case, the motive for the
kidnapping was clear. ``Their goal was only money,'' he said, ``and
they don't hide this.''


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   But even the hostage releases have only added fuel to the
politically charged atmosphere in the region, as competing groups
accuse each other of getting rich on the ransoms. Last month,
Maskhadov accused a Russian financier, Boris Berezovsky, of fueling
the kidnapping industry by paying out huge ransoms.


   Berezovsky _ who has played an open role in negotiating the
release of a number of hostages _ has routinely denied the charges,
although he has said he provided humanitarian assistance, computers
and textbooks to Chechnya in an effort to secure good will.


   ``I tried to do everything possible on my side to stop this
mess,'' he said Tuesday. ``Until this case, we were lucky.''


   Russian Interior Ministry officials have insisted that Vlasov
was released after a special operation mounted with the aid of
troops from Ingushetia, without the participation of any Chechen
forces. However, Chechen officials contend that in this case, too,
a ransom was paid. ``Money has been paid in every case,'' said
Sharip Yusupov, a Chechen living in Moscow, who for five years was
Chechnya's representative in the Russian capital.


   Yusupov said he thought the brazen killing of the four
telecommunications specialists was a sign that the kidnappers no
longer expect to get ransom money from Russian officials. ``The
kidnapping industry is no longer profitable,'' he said, ``which
left these people without a `master.' They were caught in a
squeeze.''


   According to another theory, the kidnappers may have killed
their victims because they feared they were about to be caught.
Maskhadov, at a news conference in Grozny Tuesday, said that a
captured suspect had begun to give information last week about the
location of the kidnappers. In London, a spokesman for Granger
Telecom, the British company that employed the men, said they had
had word last week that the hostages were safe.

