

   LOS ANGELES _ In 1992, in a good year for Democrats, Barbara
Boxer won her seat in the U.S. Senate with 48 percent of the vote.
In the six years since, she has been a reliably outspoken liberal
from a state that is less so, and has never managed to lift her job
approval ratings above 50 percent.


   Now, in what is shaping up as a bad year for Democrats, Ms.
Boxer is struggling to hold her own against a comparative neophyte,
the Republican state treasurer, Matt Fong. Their contest has become
one of a handful of closely watched races that will determine
whether the Republicans can win a filibuster-proof 60-seat majority
that could shape the congressional landscape for years.


   As the House of Representatives prepares to debate whether to
open a formal impeachment inquiry into President Clinton's conduct
in the Monica Lewinsky matter, much attention has focused on the
plight of House Democrats in swing districts.


   But from California to Wisconsin, from Illinois to Nevada, from
Kentucky to South Carolina, Senate seats now held by Democrats are
also in jeopardy, raising the possibility of the biggest Republican
majority in the Senate since the administration of Warren G.
Harding in 1921-23, when the party held 59 seats in a 96-member
body.


   ``It's just that the Republicans have more opportunities, and
better opportunities,'' said Stuart Rothenberg, editor of a
respected independent political newsletter in Washington. ``The
Democrats are definitely still on the defensive, and it shows.''


   Although Clinton's own job approval ratings jumped to near his
highest ever after the release of his videotaped grand jury
testimony last month, that support has generally not carried over
to Democratic incumbents around the country, some of whom, like
Boxer and Sen. Carol Moseley-Braun of Illinois, were vulnerable
long before Clinton's current troubles ever surfaced.


   In the Senate alone, Democrats have lost 11 seats since
Clinton's 1992 victory, and Republicans hold a 55-45 majority.


   ``Publicly, the congressional Democrats defend the president a
bit,'' said Ross Baker, a professor of political science at Rutgers
University and a leading expert on the Senate. ``But privately,
they're angry and worried and scared.


   ``It's a case of the ship leaving the sinking rats.''


   One senior Democratic senator, now in his fourth term, summed up
the situation this way, speaking on the condition of anonymity.
``When I came here, there were 64 Democratic senators,'' the
senator said. ``Now we'll be lucky to get 42.''


   With its magisterial pace, rarefied folkways and six-year
election cycles, the Senate has always been less subject to the
vicissitudes of voter sentiment than the House, whose entire
membership faces re-election every two years.


   But when changes in the Senate do occur, experience has shown
that they can be big changes.


   In years like 1980, for example, when the Republicans took a
majority as Ronald Reagan was elected president, or 1986, when the
party lost control of the Senate (and lost more seats there than it
did in the House), or 1994, when the Democrats lost control of both
houses after the failure of Clinton's proposed health care
overhaul, ``all the close races went one way,'' Rothenberg said.


   If Republicans win all the close Senate races where they are now
thought to be in striking distance, experts say they could well
make the net gain of five seats needed to reach 60, the number of
votes needed to cut off floor debate and block a Democratic
filibuster.


   ``I think there's about a 30 percent chance of that happening,''
said Jennifer E. Duffy, the Senate editor of the Cook Political
Report, another highly regarded nonpartisan newsletter in
Washington. ``A gain of three seats is the worst they'll do.''


   Of the 34 Senate seats up this year, 10 are considered safely
Republican and 9 safely Democratic.


   The Ohio seat being vacated by John Glenn, a Democrat who is
retiring, is considered a likely bet for Gov. George Voinovich, a
Republican, while the Republican seat in Indiana being surrendered
by Dan Coats is likely to be won by former Gov. Evan Bayh, a
Democrat seeking to reclaim the office once held by his father,
Birch.


   That means Republicans would have to hold onto all 5 of the
remaining seats the party now holds, from New York, North Carolina,
Missouri, Colorado and Georgia, and pick up 6 of the remaining 8
Democratic-held seats to achieve the net gain of 5 seats needed to
reach 60. Their best bets are Illinois, California, Kentucky,
Nevada, Wisconsin, Washington state and South Carolina.


   Democratic senators are in trouble for a range of reasons, from
changing voter demographics, which have left incumbents like Harry
Reid of Nevada and Ernest Hollings of South Carolina facing
electorates decidedly more Republican than the ones that chose them
to begin with, to the failure of some senators, like Boxer and
Moseley-Braun, to solidify their original base of support.


   Moseley-Braun, like Boxer a member of the 1992 ``Year of the
Woman'' class and the first black woman ever elected to the Senate,
is running 10 points behind her Republican challenger, state Sen.
Peter Fitzgerald, in the latest polls, and national Democratic
officials seem to have all but conceded the seat. In Washington
state, another member of the 1992 class, Patty Murray, holds only a
slight lead over her Republican challenger, Rep. Linda Smith.


   nn


   In Wisconsin, Russell Feingold, the Democratic co-sponsor of the
campaign finance reform bill that bears his name, is testing that
proposition in his own race, eschewing ``soft-money'' contributions
from his national party. He recently let his opponent, Rep. Mark
Neumann, broadcast a heavy dose of unanswered television
commercials. Ms. Duffy of the Cook Report moved that race into the
toss-up category last week.


   The Kentucky seat being vacated by Sen. Wendell Ford, a
Democrat, appears to be a tossup between Representative Scotty
Baesler, a Democrat, and Jim Bunning, a Republican, with the most
recent independent poll showing a virtual dead heat.


   Boxer's situation is fairly typical, with some problems of her
own making and others exacerbated by Clinton, to whom she is
related by marriage. Her daughter, Nicole, is married to Tony
Rodham, Hillary Rodham Clinton's brother, and the senator took some
heat for her initially low-key comments about the Lewinsky scandal,
especially given her past outspoken opposition to Sen. Bob Packwood
and Judge Clarence Thomas over allegations of sexual harassment
against them.


   After Clinton's Aug. 17 admission of an ``inappropriate''
relationship with Ms. Lewinsky, Ms. Boxer eventually condemned his
behavior in strong terms on the Senate floor, but not until well
after her California colleague, Dianne Feinstein, had issued her
own stinging rebuke of Clinton.


   But Fong, who was elected state treasurer just four years ago
and whose inexperience on the stump showed in his first debate with
Boxer this summer, is hardly a powerhouse candidate. Boxer has held
roughly a 2-to-1 fund-raising advantage over him throughout the
year, and he barely eked out a victory in the Republican primary in
June against Darrel Issa, a millionaire businessman.


   ``If Barbara Boxer were all that strong politically, she'd be
way ahead of Matt Fong,'' Rothenberg said. ``She would have put him
away long ago.''


   Instead, recent polls have shown the candidates in either a dead
heat, or Fong slightly ahead among likely voters, though a
Democratic operative not affiliated with either campaign said that
recent private Democratic polls had shown Ms. Boxer opening a
single-digit lead.


   Fong began his television advertising campaign last week, with
ads in English, Cantonese, Mandarin and Spanish touting his support
for education and aimed at making inroads among minority voters
whom Republicans often overlook, though only the English-language
version stresses the necessity for children to ``read, write and
speak English so they are prepared to get a job.''


   By contrast, Boxer has been on the air for about three weeks,
most recently with a 30-second commercial, narrated by actor Martin
Sheen, that denounces Fong as ``the gun lobby's favorite
candidate'' and touts her support for new bans on assault weapons
and cheap handguns. Unlike Feinstein, Boxer has largely failed to
move beyond her liberal base and establish a strong anti-crime
reputation.


   In that regard, Boxer's first ad was perhaps even more
revealing. Broadcast in her home turf of San Francisco and
featuring footage from old family home movies, it was a soft-edged
hymn to her support for children, in the form of after-school
programs to keep them ``out of gangs, and criminal background
checks for child-care workers.''


   ``It's all about her losing a lot of her base from '92 and
having to get it back,'' said Ms. Duffy of the Cook Report. ``This
was for the soccer moms she should already have.''


   The national Republican Senatorial Committee is closely watching
California as a promising contest, along with Nevada, Wisconsin and
a handful of others, said a spokesman for the committee, Mike
Russell. He declined to speculate about how much the party might
spend to help Fong make his case, but acknowledged that ``it's
certainly a race where those kinds of resources could make a
difference.''


   ``In Boxer, you have a candidate who is stuck at 45 percent or
below, and has no real room to grow, since most people in the state
already know her and have fixed opinions of her,'' Russell said.
``Matt is not only a sharp candidate, but as an Asian-American can
chew into her base.''


   Even if the Republicans could win control of 60 seats, that
would be far from the most lopsided margin in Senate history. After
the election of 1936, at the height of the New Deal, the Democrats
held 75 seats, to 17 for the Republicans and the remaining split
among minor parties. And after Lyndon B. Johnson's 1964 landslide,
the Democrats had 68 seats to 32 for the Republicans.


   Moreover, Baker of Rutgers noted, maverick Republicans like
Sens. Olympia Snowe and Susan Collins of Maine, James Jeffords of
Vermont and John Chafee of Rhode Island so regularly break ranks
that even 60 Republican seats would not be enough to guarantee an
ironclad defense against a Democratic filibuster.


   ``It's such an individualistic institution,'' he said. ``It's
such a place of personalities and individuals, and there's a real
aversion on the part of senators to appear to be part of a herd, or
part of an unshakable bloc of votes.''



   NEW YORK _ Anyone following the U.S. Senate race in New York
this year could be forgiven for concluding that this is one of the
epic ideological battles of the 1990s: the right-wing extremist,
Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, versus the ultraliberal Brooklyn congressman,
Charles Schumer.


   On one side is D'Amato, who, as Schumer said again Sunday, voted
to cut Medicare, opposed abortion rights and battled
environmentalists. On the other is Schumer, who, as D'Amato likes
to say, voted against crime bills, opposed welfare restrictions and
supported a series of tax increases.


   But the truth behind these ideological caricatures is
considerably more complex, despite the best efforts of Schumer and
D'Amato to confuse it. These two candidates for Senate are, in
fact, political hybrids, masters of the fluid school of politics
and ideology that has emerged in U.S. elections in the 1990s, and
very much in the tradition of such successful politicians as Bill
Clinton, Rudolph Giuliani and George Pataki.


   Like Clinton, who campaigned in the New Hampshire Democratic
primary in 1992 on a promise to slash welfare, and Pataki, who ran
for New York governor in 1994 by embracing the environmental
movement, D'Amato and Schumer have defied just enough of their
parties' orthodoxy to resist easy characterization.


   Their legislative histories are certainly littered with votes
that permit their opponents to paint them as extreme, like
Schumer's voting in the state Assembly to weaken drug laws, or
D'Amato's championing of much of House Speaker Newt Gingrich's
Contract With America. But like most New Yorkers _ or more
specifically, like most people who will vote on Nov. 3 _ the
three-term Republican senator and his Democratic challenger are
closer to the center than to either extreme.


   ``I do not think they are as different as they say,'' said the
Rev. Al Sharpton, the civil rights leader who ran for the
Democratic nomination to challenge D'Amato in 1992. ``Chuck has
always been right of center in the Democratic Party, and D'Amato
has always been, well, whatever works for him on that given day.
They are both rewriting as they go.''


   The flood of conflicting vote citations and ideological
name-calling that have filled the state's airwaves notwithstanding,
these first three weeks of the general election campaign have been
less about ideology and more about tactics. With a nod to the
political reality of the moderate cast of New York's electorate,
D'Amato and Schumer are each trying to accomplish the same thing,
if from different corners of the ring: to cover the tracks of their
own political evolution while portraying their opponent as extreme.


   This maneuvering began on the first day of the general election
campaign as D'Amato attacked Schumer as liberal while the
representative assailed D'Amato as soft on crime. And it has
continued every day since then, testimony to one of the most
enduring facts of this contest: Whatever their differences on
issues, as political tacticians, Schumer and D'Amato have similar
reflexes.


   This is nothing new for D'Amato. He has historically prepared
for each election with a march on the political center, and then
campaigned by portraying his opponents, notably Robert Abrams, the
state attorney general, in 1992, as liberal vestiges. This formula,
combined with a record of tending to the more parochial needs of
the state and its voters, largely accounts for D'Amato's repeated
success at winning re-election in what is, by registration, a
strongly Democratic state.


   What is different this time is that D'Amato has encountered in
Schumer a challenger who is trying to do to the senator what the
senator typically does to his opponent. The representative has
parried each ideological assault by D'Amato by asserting that it is
the senator who is the ideological extremist, and then by blurring
his own ideological evolution with a recitation of what was his own
march on the political center as he prepared in Congress for this
race.


   It seems unlikely that Schumer will ever convince voters that he
is, for example, tougher on crime than D'Amato, or that D'Amato is
a foot soldier for Gingrich's Republican revolution. But at the
very least, by echoing D'Amato's tactics, Schumer may succeed in
neutralizing a weapon that D'Amato has used against previous
opponents to devastating effect.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   nn


   D'Amato certainly has a basis for saying that Schumer is to the
left of most of the U.S. electorate. Schumer voted against the 1996
bill that restricted welfare benefits. He opposed the
balanced-budget amendment. He has supported a series of tax
increases over the years. He voted for federal legislation that
would ban discrimination in hiring homosexuals. He has voted
against measures that would make it easier to jail juveniles in
adult prisons, and against another measure that would have imposed
additional penalties for crimes involving the use of guns.


   But Schumer, who has spent many of his 18 years in Congress
preparing for the seven weeks of this general election campaign,
has also repeatedly voted in favor of a federal death penalty.
(Though Schumer earlier in his life opposed the death penalty.) He
was the sponsor of legislation to provide funds to hire police
officers and to ban many forms of assault weapons. He voted to
restrict the rights of illegal immigrants in some cases, and in
favor of legislation to crack down on food-stamp fraud. He
supported the line-item veto. He also voted in favor of a measure
that would ban the recognition of marriages between homosexuals.


   Similarly, on many levels, D'Amato's Republican credentials seem
more than secure. He has opposed abortion rights throughout his
career, and voted against gun control. He has supported many
aspects of Gingrich's attempts to cut social spending, and his
votes on environmental legislation have earned him consistently
weak ratings from national environmental groups.


   Yet D'Amato is no less nimble than Schumer. The senator voted
for the federal legislation that would ban discrimination in hiring
against homosexuals; he is poised to win the endorsement of one of
the nation's major gay rights groups, the Human Rights Campaign. He
became one of the chief advocates in Washington of repealing
legislation passed by a Republican Congress (with his support) that
curbed benefits to the children of illegal immigrants.


   On Sunday, he spoke before one of the largest black
congregations in New York City at the church in Queens led by a
former congressman, the Rev. Floyd H. Flake, where he recounted his
efforts to push through a commemorative coin for Jackie Robinson.


   He is planning to testify in Washington on Tuesday about ways to
curb acid rain. And he has pushed consistently and successfully for
spending on breast cancer research and screening.


   As a matter of politics, the efforts by these two candidates
suggests how complicated it is becoming to run a statewide race in
New York. The shifting ideology of the electorate, combined with
the diminishing vote out of New York City in state elections, means
that being viewed as a liberal is no longer the electoral lift that
it once was. Yet New York remains a long way from being a
conservative state.


   In the end, the best evidence of where these two candidates
stand could be found in the endorsement by Schumer last week by
District Council 37, the umbrella group of unions representing New
York City employees. What was surprising was not that this
historically solid Democratic union endorsed Schumer but that it
anguished so much over it all.


   ``There are differences between them,'' said Norman Adler, the
political consultant who works for Republicans and Democrats. ``But
on the whole, they are less different than you would like to
think.''



   NEW YORK _ Anyone following the U.S. Senate race in New York
this year could be forgiven for concluding that this is one of the
epic ideological battles of the 1990s: the right-wing extremist,
Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, versus the ultraliberal Brooklyn congressman,
Charles Schumer.


   On one side is D'Amato, who, as Schumer said again Sunday, voted
to cut Medicare, opposed abortion rights and battled
environmentalists. On the other is Schumer, who, as D'Amato likes
to say, voted against crime bills, opposed welfare restrictions and
supported a series of tax increases.


   But the truth behind these ideological caricatures is
considerably more complex, despite the best efforts of Schumer and
D'Amato to confuse it. These two candidates for Senate are, in
fact, political hybrids, masters of the fluid school of politics
and ideology that has emerged in U.S. elections in the 1990s, and
very much in the tradition of such successful politicians as Bill
Clinton, Rudolph Giuliani and George Pataki.


   Like Clinton, who campaigned in the New Hampshire Democratic
primary in 1992 on a promise to slash welfare, and Pataki, who ran
for New York governor in 1994 by embracing the environmental
movement, D'Amato and Schumer have defied just enough of their
parties' orthodoxy to resist easy characterization.


   Their legislative histories are certainly littered with votes
that permit their opponents to paint them as extreme, like
Schumer's voting in the state Assembly to weaken drug laws, or
D'Amato's championing of much of House Speaker Newt Gingrich's
Contract With America. But like most New Yorkers _ or more
specifically, like most people who will vote on Nov. 3 _ the
three-term Republican senator and his Democratic challenger are
closer to the center than to either extreme.


   ``I do not think they are as different as they say,'' said the
Rev. Al Sharpton, the civil rights leader who ran for the
Democratic nomination to challenge D'Amato in 1992. ``Chuck has
always been right of center in the Democratic Party, and D'Amato
has always been, well, whatever works for him on that given day.
They are both rewriting as they go.''


   The flood of conflicting vote citations and ideological
name-calling that have filled the state's airwaves notwithstanding,
these first three weeks of the general election campaign have been
less about ideology and more about tactics. With a nod to the
political reality of the moderate cast of New York's electorate,
D'Amato and Schumer are each trying to accomplish the same thing,
if from different corners of the ring: to cover the tracks of their
own political evolution while portraying their opponent as extreme.


   This maneuvering began on the first day of the general election
campaign as D'Amato attacked Schumer as liberal while the
representative assailed D'Amato as soft on crime. And it has
continued every day since then, testimony to one of the most
enduring facts of this contest: Whatever their differences on
issues, as political tacticians, Schumer and D'Amato have similar
reflexes.


   This is nothing new for D'Amato. He has historically prepared
for each election with a march on the political center, and then
campaigned by portraying his opponents, notably Robert Abrams, the
state attorney general, in 1992, as liberal vestiges. This formula,
combined with a record of tending to the more parochial needs of
the state and its voters, largely accounts for D'Amato's repeated
success at winning re-election in what is, by registration, a
strongly Democratic state.


   What is different this time is that D'Amato has encountered in
Schumer a challenger who is trying to do to the senator what the
senator typically does to his opponent. The representative has
parried each ideological assault by D'Amato by asserting that it is
the senator who is the ideological extremist, and then by blurring
his own ideological evolution with a recitation of what was his own
march on the political center as he prepared in Congress for this
race.


   It seems unlikely that Schumer will ever convince voters that he
is, for example, tougher on crime than D'Amato, or that D'Amato is
a foot soldier for Gingrich's Republican revolution. But at the
very least, by echoing D'Amato's tactics, Schumer may succeed in
neutralizing a weapon that D'Amato has used against previous
opponents to devastating effect.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   nn


   D'Amato certainly has a basis for saying that Schumer is to the
left of most of the U.S. electorate. Schumer voted against the 1996
bill that restricted welfare benefits. He opposed the
balanced-budget amendment. He has supported a series of tax
increases over the years. He voted for federal legislation that
would ban discrimination in hiring homosexuals. He has voted
against measures that would make it easier to jail juveniles in
adult prisons, and against another measure that would have imposed
additional penalties for crimes involving the use of guns.


   But Schumer, who has spent many of his 18 years in Congress
preparing for the seven weeks of this general election campaign,
has also repeatedly voted in favor of a federal death penalty.
(Though Schumer earlier in his life opposed the death penalty.) He
was the sponsor of legislation to provide funds to hire police
officers and to ban many forms of assault weapons. He voted to
restrict the rights of illegal immigrants in some cases, and in
favor of legislation to crack down on food-stamp fraud. He
supported the line-item veto. He also voted in favor of a measure
that would ban the recognition of marriages between homosexuals.


   Similarly, on many levels, D'Amato's Republican credentials seem
more than secure. He has opposed abortion rights throughout his
career, and voted against gun control. He has supported many
aspects of Gingrich's attempts to cut social spending, and his
votes on environmental legislation have earned him consistently
weak ratings from national environmental groups.


   Yet D'Amato is no less nimble than Schumer. The senator voted
for the federal legislation that would ban discrimination in hiring
against homosexuals; he is poised to win the endorsement of one of
the nation's major gay rights groups, the Human Rights Campaign. He
became one of the chief advocates in Washington of repealing
legislation passed by a Republican Congress (with his support) that
curbed benefits to the children of illegal immigrants.


   On Sunday, he spoke before one of the largest black
congregations in New York City at the church in Queens led by a
former congressman, the Rev. Floyd H. Flake, where he recounted his
efforts to push through a commemorative coin for Jackie Robinson.


   He is planning to testify in Washington on Tuesday about ways to
curb acid rain. And he has pushed consistently and successfully for
spending on breast cancer research and screening.


   As a matter of politics, the efforts by these two candidates
suggests how complicated it is becoming to run a statewide race in
New York. The shifting ideology of the electorate, combined with
the diminishing vote out of New York City in state elections, means
that being viewed as a liberal is no longer the electoral lift that
it once was. Yet New York remains a long way from being a
conservative state.


   In the end, the best evidence of where these two candidates
stand could be found in the endorsement by Schumer last week by
District Council 37, the umbrella group of unions representing New
York City employees. What was surprising was not that this
historically solid Democratic union endorsed Schumer but that it
anguished so much over it all.


   ``There are differences between them,'' said Norman Adler, the
political consultant who works for Republicans and Democrats. ``But
on the whole, they are less different than you would like to
think.''



   WASHINGTON _ As several of its members observed, Monday's debate
and votes in the House Judiciary Committee marked only the third
time in the nation's history that impeachment of a president has
been formally considered on Capitol Hill.


   In that limited sense, the approval of a full-scale impeachment
process was historic. But it was by no means decisive, no matter
how much the legislators huffed and puffed.


   It was only a first short step along a rocky road whose length
is not known _not by President Clinton, not by the public and not
even by committee members (although the chairman, Rep. Henry Hyde,
R-Ill., said this weekend that he hoped the House of
Representatives could finish its work before year's end).


   ``The Constitution provides our compass,'' said Rep. Edward
Pease, R-Ind. ``I intend to follow it.'' But neither he nor his
colleagues could say for sure where it would ultimately point.


   Meeting in the same room where Richard Nixon's fate was sealed a
quarter-century ago, Republicans stressed parallels to that era.
This case is about law-breaking, they said, and not about illicit
sex. To which Rep. John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, the committee's
senior Democrat, retorted: ``This is not about Watergate. It is
about an extramarital affair.''


   That is the fault line, so far unbridgeable, between the two
parties.


   People in Washington universally assume that the House as a
whole will vote later this week to ratify the committee's decision.
The Republicans have the votes to prevail. But if only Republicans
support the procedural plans set out by their leadership, as was
the case in the final vote Monday night, the decision will be seen
by many in the country as a purely partisan proposition.


   That next roll call will help set the tone for what lies ahead.
If only a half-dozen Democrats join the Republicans, the image of
trench warfare will be reinforced and the subsequent inquiry will
begin under something of a cloud; if 50 or 75 do so, the vote will
confer a greater degree of legitimacy.


   The more the average voter thinks that the Republicans are
ganging up on the president, his strategists believe, the better
his chances of surviving.


   Of course, consensus or something approaching it may develop
later. Only well into the final stages of the committee's 1974
hearings on the impeachment of Nixon did significant numbers of
Republican members join the Democrats in concluding that Nixon had
committed impeachable offenses. The fact that they finally did led
people on both sides to judge its actions fair.


   In the other case of presidential impeachment, Andrew Johnson
survived a Senate trial because just enough members of the
opposition party broke ranks and voted to back him.


   Once this week's votes have been taken, attention will shift to
the midterm elections on Nov. 3. The conventional wisdom in
Washington has shifted rapidly in recent days, from a belief in the
days before the release of Kenneth Starr's report that changes
would be minimal, especially in the House, to a suspicion that
Democratic losses would be large, which took hold in the days
before the tape of Clinton's grand jury testimony was released.


   Now there is a growing conviction that the Republicans erred by
releasing the tape, creating a backlash that could help marginal
House Democrats.


   Two caveats seem in order, however. While the president's
troubles seem less likely to influence Senate races, Democrats were
in big trouble in those without any drag from Washington. A number
of independent analysts see Republican gains of four to six seats.
Major losses in the House are still possible, too, perhaps 20 or
more seats if Republican voters turn out en masse and Democrats do
not.


   ``I'm astonished,'' said a senior Republican senator on Capitol
Hill, who comes from the Sun Belt. ``Differential turnouts aren't
really very common, you know. But this year, Democratic voters seem
to be in a sulk, and the Republicans act like they'd turn out even
if it snowed on Election Day.''


   Big gains might embolden Republican legislators in their pursuit
of Clinton. But the political terrain is tricky. After November,
both parties will have to play to the 2000 electorate _ larger,
spread more broadly across the economic scale, and less intensely
partisan _ and that might have a tempering effect on the zeal of
the Republicans in Congress.


   The detailed terms of the case developed by the inquiry, and how
it is developed, will have an impact as well. Unshakeable as the
preconceptions of many committee members sounded Monday, experience
suggests that over a long period, some of them and some others in
the House will change their minds.


   If Clinton and Monica Lewinsky are called as witnesses, their
deportment will certainly influence some representatives. How they
and their interrogators behave will influence voters as well.
Clinton is a formidable persuader, and any attempt to break down
his testimony would run the risk of alienating people who would
sense disrespect for the presidency.


   A foreign crisis _ a genuine foreign crisis, as opposed to one
that the administration was suspected of inventing _ could
radically change the context of the inquiry, too. Republicans might
find themselves under fire for distracting the commander in chief
from important security responsibilites.


   And what of the topics other than Ms. Lewinsky that Starr has
investigated? Hyde insisted Monday night that the independent
counsel was still pursuing the original Whitewater matter and other
controversies; one of the committee's ranking Democrats, Rep.
Barney Frank of Massachusetts, insisted that no more would be
forthcoming from Starr. Ambiguity keeps the pot boiling; wrapping
up the other cases would take some of the steam out of the House
inquiry.


   All of those ideas, all of those possibilities will be in the
air as the House debates impeachment in November and December.
Depending on how they coalesce, the Republican leadership might or
might not be receptive to a compromise, either before a committee
vote or after a committee vote to approve articles of impeachment,
before ratification by the House as a whole.


   At any time, of course, Clinton could change his mind and decide
to resign. Nixon's decision to quit came after the committee had
voted. But it was motivated by the emergence of new evidence (the
``smoking gun'') more than the vote itself, plus the belief he
could not win in the Senate.


   Clinton's aides say he would rather be a second Andrew Johnson,
surviving in the Senate by a tiny margin, than a second Richard
Nixon. As things now stand, he would appear to have a good chance
of getting the 34 votes he would need (one-third of the total plus
one) to win a Senate trial.


   But that is not chiseled in stone, either. The Republicans could
have 60 seats by the time the case reached the Senate. In that
case, if they lost none of their own partisans, a switch of only
seven Democrats would doom Clinton. A remote possibility,
certainly, but then so much of what has happened so far in this
case seemed highly improbable until it happened.



   WASHINGTON _ Almost every member of the House Judiciary
Committee paid some tribute to the Constitution and the Founding
Fathers Monday. Many said portentously that their debates and votes
would be remembered for generations. The muse of history was
obviously working overtime.


   True, it was only the third time that presidential impeachment
has been formally considered on Capitol Hill. But only in that
limited sense was the approval of a full-scale impeachment process
historic. It was by no means decisive, no matter how much the
legislators huffed and puffed.


   This was only a first step along a rocky road whose length is
not known _ not by President Clinton, not by the public and not
even by committee members (although the chairman, Rep. Henry J.
Hyde, R-Ill., said last weekend that he hoped the House of
Representatives could finish its work before year's end).


   ``The Constitution provides our compass,'' said Rep. Edward
Pease, R-Ind. ``I intend to follow it.'' But neither he nor his
colleagues could say for sure where it would ultimately point.


   Meeting in the same room where Richard Nixon's fate was sealed a
quarter-century ago, Republicans stressed parallels to that era.
This case is about law-breaking, they said, and not about illicit
sex. To which Rep. John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, the committee's
senior Democrat, retorted: ``This is not about Watergate. It is
about an extramarital affair.''


   That is the fault line, so far unbridgeable, between the two
parties.


   People in Washington universally assume that the House as a
whole will vote later this week to ratify the committee's decision.
The Republicans have the votes to prevail. But if only Republicans
support the procedural plans set out by their leadership, as was
the case in the final vote Monday night, the decision will be seen
by many in the country as a purely partisan proposition.


   That next roll call will help set the tone for what lies ahead.
If only a half-dozen Democrats join the Republicans, the image of
trench warfare will be reinforced and the subsequent inquiry will
begin under something of a cloud; if 50 or 75 do so, the vote will
confer a greater degree of legitimacy.


   The more the average voter thinks that the Republicans are
ganging up on the president, his strategists believe, the better
his chances of surviving.


   Of course, consensus or something approaching it may develop
later. Only well into the final stages of the committee's 1974
hearings on the impeachment of Nixon did significant numbers of
Republican members join the Democrats in concluding that Nixon had
committed impeachable offenses. The fact that they finally did led
people on both sides to judge its actions fair.


   In the other case of presidential impeachment, Andrew Johnson
survived a Senate trial because just enough members of the
opposition party broke ranks and voted to back him.


   Once this week's votes have been taken, attention will shift to
the midterm elections on Nov. 3. The conventional wisdom in
Washington has shifted rapidly in recent days, from a belief in the
days before the release of Kenneth Starr's report that changes
would be minimal, especially in the House, to a suspicion that
Democratic losses would be large, which took hold in the days
before the tape of Clinton's grand jury testimony was released.


   Now there is a growing conviction that the Republicans erred by
releasing the tape, creating a backlash that could help marginal
House Democrats.


   Two caveats seem in order, however. While the president's
troubles seem less likely to influence Senate races, Democrats were
in big trouble in those without any drag from Washington. A number
of independent analysts see Republican gains of four to six seats.
Major losses in the House are still possible, too, perhaps 20 or
more seats if Republican voters turn out en masse and Democrats do
not.


   ``Differential turnouts aren't really very common, you know,''
said a senior Republican senator on Capitol Hill. ``But this year,
Democratic voters seem to be in a sulk, and the Republicans act
like they'd turn out even if it snowed on Election Day.''


   Big gains might embolden Republican legislators in their pursuit
of Clinton. But the political terrain is tricky. After November,
both parties will have to play to the 2000 electorate _ larger,
spread more broadly across the economic scale, and less intensely
partisan _ and that might have a tempering effect on the zeal of
the Republicans in Congress.


   The detailed terms of the case developed by the inquiry, and how
it is developed, will have an impact as well. Unshakeable as the
preconceptions of many committee members sounded Monday, experience
suggests that over a long period, some of them and some others in
the House will change their minds.


   If Clinton and Monica Lewinsky are called as witnesses, their
deportment will certainly influence some representatives. How they
and their interrogators behave will influence voters as well.
Clinton is a formidable persuader, and any attempt to break down
his testimony would run the risk of alienating people who would
sense disrespect for the presidency.


   A foreign crisis _ a genuine foreign crisis, as opposed to one
that the administration was suspected of inventing _ could
radically change the context of the inquiry, too. Republicans might
find themselves under fire for distracting the commander in chief
from important security responsibilities.


   And what of the topics other than Ms. Lewinsky that Starr has
investigated? Hyde insisted Monday night that the independent
counsel was still pursuing the original Whitewater matter and other
controversies; one of the committee's ranking Democrats, Rep.
Barney Frank of Massachusetts, insisted that no more would be
forthcoming from Starr. Ambiguity keeps the pot boiling; wrapping
up the other cases would take some of the steam out of the House
inquiry.


   All of those ideas, all of those possibilities will be in the
air as the House debates impeachment in November and December.
Depending on how they coalesce, the Republican leadership might or
might not be receptive to a compromise, either before a committee
vote or after a committee vote to approve articles of impeachment,
before ratification by the House as a whole.


   At any time, of course, Clinton could change his mind and decide
to resign. Nixon's decision to quit came after the committee had
voted. But it was motivated by the emergence of new evidence more
than the vote itself, plus the belief he could not win in the
Senate.


   Clinton's aides say he would rather be a second Andrew Johnson,
surviving in the Senate by a tiny margin, than a second Richard
Nixon. As things now stand, he would appear to have a good chance
of getting the 34 votes he would need (one-third of the total plus
one) to win a Senate trial.


   But that is not chiseled in stone, either. The Republicans could
have 60 seats by the time the case reached the Senate. In that
case, if they lost none of their own partisans, a switch of only
seven Democrats would doom Clinton. A remote possibility,
certainly, but then so much of what has happened so far in this
case seemed highly improbable until it happened.



   Sen. Alfonse D'Amato and Rep. Charles Schumer are locked in an
extraordinarily tight race for the U.S. Senate. The outcome
apparently rests with a small group of undecided voters, many of
whom are not yet paying attention to the contest, a statewide New
York Times/CBS News Poll has found.


   With a month to go until the election, the poll found a large
number of respondents _ 60 percent _ either had no opinion about
Schumer, or did not know enough about him to offer an opinion. At
the same time, a sizable number of voters continue to voice
reservations about D'Amato's ethics and ideology, including many
undecided voters and some respondents who identified themselves as
the senator's supporters.


   The findings suggest two dynamics that will shape the New York
contest in its final weeks: a struggle by both camps to define
Schumer's public personality among voters who do not know him, and
an attempt by Schumer to exploit the obvious and strong liabilities
D'Amato carries as a three-term Republican senator in New York.


   In some ways, this closely watched contest is shaping up as a
replay of the 1992 Senate race, when D'Amato ran against Robert
Abrams, the former state attorney general. A Times poll in the
third week of October 1992 found D'Amato in an effective tie with
his Democratic challenger. D'Amato ultimately defeated Abrams by a
single percentage point after a searing campaign.


   But this latest Times/CBS News poll points to a number of ways
in which this contest is different from 1992, and that is not
necessarily good news for D'Amato. An equal number of voters now
view D'Amato and Schumer as being serious when it comes to dealing
with crime, evidence that the nine-term Brooklyn congressman has
achieved some success in neutralizing a traditionally Republican
issue.


   While D'Amato continues to be widely viewed as ``the kind of
person who gets things done for the voters'' _ clearly one of his
biggest political advantages going into the last couple of months _
a substantial number of respondents said he was lacking in honesty
and integrity, and that he did not care ``about the needs and
problems of people like you.'' Schumer scored strongly on both
measures.


   And perhaps most strikingly, D'Amato's intense effort to derail
Schumer's campaign with a series of attacks these past three weeks
_ from portraying him as a liberal to spotlighting votes he has
missed in Washington as he campaigned in New York this year _ has
yet to show obvious effect on the public's view of the congressman.
Only 18 percent of respondents had an unfavorable rating of
Schumer, compared to 22 percent who had a favorable rating. By
contrast, in a poll conducted in the third week of October of 1992,
Abrams was viewed unfavorably by one in three voters.


   In the current poll, D'Amato is viewed favorably by 27 percent
and unfavorably by 36 percent, virtually the same marks he received
six years ago.


   By almost every measure that pollsters use to try to analyze an
election _ registered voters, likely voters, and taking into
account how undecided New Yorkers might be leaning toward _ this
contest is a dead heat.


   Among registered voters, Schumer is supported by 44 percent,
compared to 41 percent for D'Amato. There were 12 percent
undecided. Among those respondents considered most likely to vote,
based on their past behavior and current level of interest in the
contest, the margin is 47 percent for Schumer to 43 percent for
D'Amato.


   The Times/CBS News statewide telephone poll was conducted from
last Thursday through Tuesday with 1,461 adults, of whom 1,066 said
they were registered to vote. It has a margin of sampling error of
plus or minus three points. Therefore, among registered voters,
Schumer could be ahead by as much as nine points _ or D'Amato could
be ahead by three points.



   CHICAGO _ She says he is ``duplicitous,'' a ``wolf in sheep's
clothing'' who has resorted to ``scuzzball'' campaign tactics in
the past. He has described her as ``shrill,'' claims she ``has
nothing positive to say about her own record'' and that her career
has been ``obscured by numerous scandals and controversies.''


   The U.S. Senate race between the incumbent Democrat, Carol
Moseley-Braun, and state Sen. Peter Fitzgerald, a conservative
Republican, has become one of the most tensely watched campaigns in
the country. And with less than a month to go, the candidates have
dropped all pretense of keeping the gloves on.


   The latest poll, published last week in The Chicago Tribune,
suggests that Ms. Moseley-Braun, elected in 1992 as a radiantly
rising star, is in serious election trouble. She lagged behind
Fitzgerald by 10 percentage points, with more voters saying they
believed Fitzgerald was the more honest and trustworthy candidate.
The poll, which had a margin of error of 3 percentage points, also
suggested that she has lost considerable support among suburban
women, one of the main groups that swept her into office six years
ago in what became known as the ``Year of the Woman.''


   Dogged by a series of missteps and poor judgments in her
personal and political life, Ms. Moseley-Braun, 51, who was
catapulted from an obscure Cook County office to become the
nation's first black female senator, has had trouble getting voters
to focus on her legislative accomplishments. And she has been
soundly outspent by Fitzgerald, a 37-year-old multimillionaire from
the Chicago suburbs who inherited his family banking fortune and
spent $7 million of his own money on the Republican primary alone.


   ``Have I not handled my own publicity and image making as well
as I could have?'' Ms. Moseley-Braun said in an interview.
``There's no question about that. Have I not handled the politics
as well as I could have? No question. But I certainly have worked
as hard as I can. I've got a great legislative record. And with all
the things that have been thrown at me, none of them has stuck.''


   Fitzgerald, considered so conservative that most Republican
leaders supported his moderate opponent in the bitterly contested
primary, has wasted no opportunity to try to make Ms.
Moseley-Braun's mistakes stick and to deflect her characterization
of him as an extremist by painting her as an ineffectual liberal.


   ``Although her career has been somewhat obscured by numerous
scandals and controversies, those who have noticed her voting
record have noticed it is very extreme,'' Fitzgerald said in an
interview.


   Across the board, these are tough times for Illinois Democrats.
In the hotly contested race to replace Gov. Jim Edgar, a Republican
who is retiring, Glenn Poshard, a Democratic congressman from
downstate Illinois, trailed George Ryan, the Republican Secretary
of State, by 22 percentage points in The Tribune's poll.


   Poshard has alienated liberal Democrats with his opposition to
abortion rights and some gay rights issues, as well as his past
votes against gun control and environmental measures. And he has
tried without much success to tar Ryan with a scandal in which
employees of the secretary of state's office are accused of taking
bribes in return for granting truck licenses, and using some of the
bribe money to support Ryan and other candidates.


   Democrats running for other offices, even those in heavily
Democratic Cook County, are running into trouble, too. This year,
the state legislature eliminated straight-party voting in Illinois,
long considered a boon to Democrats. And although Democrats are
hoping that the efforts of congressional Republicans to impeach
President Clinton may spur Democrats to the polls in a kind of
backlash, so far the president's problems have not helped matters
and could lower turnout among Democratic voters. ( Poshard even
stayed away from a Chicago fund-raiser on his behalf which Clinton
attended).


   All of that is making things harder for Ms. Moseley-Braun in a
race that has her looking more like a challenger than an incumbent.


   ``I've always thought she was going to be in a tough race, even
against Fitzgerald, but I didn't think it was going to be this
tough,'' said Dawn Clark Netsch, a Democrat who ran for governor in
1994.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   nn


   The senator had to press hard to get Fitzgerald to agree to a
debate, which was held on Sunday. After it was over, she said she
had not expected him to try to ``paint himself as a centrist'' and
said, ``I could have made him show his true colors better.''


   Fitzgerald, for his part, said the senator sounded ``shrill'' in
the debate and that she ``wasn't even able to understand what I was
talking about when I was talking about Social Security.''


   Democrats had hoped Fitzgerald would win the primary because
they believed his conservative views would make him easier to
defeat.


   Fitzgerald, who started running for the state legislature soon
after he finished law school, believes his wealth has allowed him
to be more independent in his political views. He opposes abortion,
even in cases of rape or incest, sponsored a bill signed into law
by Edgar that bans same-sex marriages and would screen gay people
out of the military. He would use the federal budget surplus to
provide tax cuts, while Ms. Moseley-Braun would use it to shore up
Social Security.


   Ms. Moseley-Braun, who sits on the Senate Finance Committee, has
concentrated on cleaning up polluted industrial sites in cities,
fixing decrepit school buildings, improving pension laws for women
and fighting for tax breaks on airline tickets and ethanol, issues
important in Illinois.


   But from the start, she has also had to fend off accusations
that she misused an inheritance instead of reimbursing Medicaid for
her mother's care, ignored accusations of sexual harassment against
her 1992 campaign manager and former fiance, Kgosie Matthews, and
that she and Matthews spent tens of thousands of campaign dollars
on personal travel, clothes, jewelry and stereo equipment.


   Although no investigation found any criminal wrongdoing and Ms.
Moseley-Braun has acknowledged making mistakes in judgment, she has
not been able to shake what she calls her ``negatives.'' A few
weeks ago, when George Will raised these issues in his column, the
senator lost her temper, used a racial slur to portray herself as a
victim of racism and compared Will to a member of the Ku Klux Klan,
forcing her to apologize.


   ``She knows that she's in a dogfight. Most incumbents don't want
to debate,'' said Paul Green, a professor of political science at
Governors State University in Chicago.


   In the remaining weeks of the campaign, Ms. Moseley-Braun, a
charismatic campaigner, said she will work hard to reach
disaffected supporters. Her campaign has raised about $6 million
(compared to the $10 million Fitzgerald has already spent) and has
scheduled fund-raisers with Mayor Richard Daley of Chicago, Clinton
and Hillary Rodham Clinton.


   ``I've worked myself already into bad health,'' said Ms.
Moseley-Braun, who was treated last week for bronchial pneumonia at
a Texas hospital after she fell ill on a flight to Dallas. ``I'm
doing everything I know how.''



   CHICAGO _ She says he is ``duplicitous,'' a ``wolf in sheep's
clothing'' who has resorted to ``scuzzball'' campaign tactics in
the past. He has described her as ``shrill,'' claims she ``has
nothing positive to say about her own record'' and that her career
has been ``obscured by numerous scandals and controversies.''


   The U.S. Senate race between the incumbent Democrat, Carol
Moseley-Braun, and state Sen. Peter Fitzgerald, a conservative
Republican, has become one of the most tensely watched campaigns in
the country. And with less than a month to go, the candidates have
dropped all pretense of keeping the gloves on.


   The latest poll, published last week in The Chicago Tribune,
suggests that Ms. Moseley-Braun, elected in 1992 as a radiantly
rising star, is in serious election trouble. She lagged behind
Fitzgerald by 10 percentage points, with more voters saying they
believed Fitzgerald was the more honest and trustworthy candidate.
The poll, which had a margin of error of 3 percentage points, also
suggested that she has lost considerable support among suburban
women, one of the main groups that swept her into office six years
ago in what became known as the ``Year of the Woman.''


   Dogged by a series of missteps and poor judgments in her
personal and political life, Ms. Moseley-Braun, 51, who was
catapulted from an obscure Cook County office to become the
nation's first black female senator, has had trouble getting voters
to focus on her legislative accomplishments. And she has been
soundly outspent by Fitzgerald, a 37-year-old multimillionaire from
the Chicago suburbs who inherited his family banking fortune and
spent $7 million of his own money on the Republican primary alone.


   ``Have I not handled my own publicity and image making as well
as I could have?'' Ms. Moseley-Braun said in an interview.
``There's no question about that. Have I not handled the politics
as well as I could have? No question. But I certainly have worked
as hard as I can. I've got a great legislative record. And with all
the things that have been thrown at me, none of them has stuck.''


   Fitzgerald, considered so conservative that most Republican
leaders supported his moderate opponent in the bitterly contested
primary, has wasted no opportunity to try to make Ms.
Moseley-Braun's mistakes stick and to deflect her characterization
of him as an extremist by painting her as an ineffectual liberal.


   ``Although her career has been somewhat obscured by numerous
scandals and controversies, those who have noticed her voting
record have noticed it is very extreme,'' Fitzgerald said in an
interview.


   Across the board, these are tough times for Illinois Democrats.
In the hotly contested race to replace Gov. Jim Edgar, a Republican
who is retiring, Glenn Poshard, a Democratic congressman from
downstate Illinois, trailed George Ryan, the Republican Secretary
of State, by 22 percentage points in The Tribune's poll.


   Poshard has alienated liberal Democrats with his opposition to
abortion rights and some gay rights issues, as well as his past
votes against gun control and environmental measures. And he has
tried without much success to tar Ryan with a scandal in which
employees of the secretary of state's office are accused of taking
bribes in return for granting truck licenses, and using some of the
bribe money to support Ryan and other candidates.


   Democrats running for other offices, even those in heavily
Democratic Cook County, are running into trouble, too. This year,
the state legislature eliminated straight-party voting in Illinois,
long considered a boon to Democrats. And although Democrats are
hoping that the efforts of congressional Republicans to impeach
President Clinton may spur Democrats to the polls in a kind of
backlash, so far the president's problems have not helped matters
and could lower turnout among Democratic voters. ( Poshard even
stayed away from a Chicago fund-raiser on his behalf which Clinton
attended).


   All of that is making things harder for Ms. Moseley-Braun in a
race that has her looking more like a challenger than an incumbent.


   ``I've always thought she was going to be in a tough race, even
against Fitzgerald, but I didn't think it was going to be this
tough,'' said Dawn Clark Netsch, a Democrat who ran for governor in
1994.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   nn


   The senator had to press hard to get Fitzgerald to agree to a
debate, which was held on Sunday. After it was over, she said she
had not expected him to try to ``paint himself as a centrist'' and
said, ``I could have made him show his true colors better.''


   Fitzgerald, for his part, said the senator sounded ``shrill'' in
the debate and that she ``wasn't even able to understand what I was
talking about when I was talking about Social Security.''


   Democrats had hoped Fitzgerald would win the primary because
they believed his conservative views would make him easier to
defeat.


   Fitzgerald, who started running for the state legislature soon
after he finished law school, believes his wealth has allowed him
to be more independent in his political views. He opposes abortion,
even in cases of rape or incest, sponsored a bill signed into law
by Edgar that bans same-sex marriages and would screen gay people
out of the military. He would use the federal budget surplus to
provide tax cuts, while Ms. Moseley-Braun would use it to shore up
Social Security.


   Ms. Moseley-Braun, who sits on the Senate Finance Committee, has
concentrated on cleaning up polluted industrial sites in cities,
fixing decrepit school buildings, improving pension laws for women
and fighting for tax breaks on airline tickets and ethanol, issues
important in Illinois.


   But from the start, she has also had to fend off accusations
that she misused an inheritance instead of reimbursing Medicaid for
her mother's care, ignored accusations of sexual harassment against
her 1992 campaign manager and former fiance, Kgosie Matthews, and
that she and Matthews spent tens of thousands of campaign dollars
on personal travel, clothes, jewelry and stereo equipment.


   Although no investigation found any criminal wrongdoing and Ms.
Moseley-Braun has acknowledged making mistakes in judgment, she has
not been able to shake what she calls her ``negatives.'' A few
weeks ago, when George Will raised these issues in his column, the
senator lost her temper, used a racial slur to portray herself as a
victim of racism and compared Will to a member of the Ku Klux Klan,
forcing her to apologize.


   ``She knows that she's in a dogfight. Most incumbents don't want
to debate,'' said Paul Green, a professor of political science at
Governors State University in Chicago.


   In the remaining weeks of the campaign, Ms. Moseley-Braun, a
charismatic campaigner, said she will work hard to reach
disaffected supporters. Her campaign has raised about $6 million
(compared to the $10 million Fitzgerald has already spent) and has
scheduled fund-raisers with Mayor Richard Daley of Chicago, Clinton
and Hillary Rodham Clinton.


   ``I've worked myself already into bad health,'' said Ms.
Moseley-Braun, who was treated last week for bronchial pneumonia at
a Texas hospital after she fell ill on a flight to Dallas. ``I'm
doing everything I know how.''



   WASHINGTON _ Rep. Louise Slaughter has not been a big fan of her
fellow Democrat Bill Clinton. She thinks that he was a major reason
the Democrats lost control of Congress in 1994, that he has struck
one too many deals with the Republicans, and that his behavior has
been reckless and abhorrent. Two months ago, she was on the verge
of urging him to resign.


   But as the House prepares to vote on whether to open an
impeachment inquiry into the president, Ms. Slaughter, from
Rochester, N.Y., finds herself deeply torn. As much as she would
not mind seeing Bill Clinton out of office, she worries that
Congress is about to start down a path the Founding Fathers never
envisioned.


   ``I'm not interested in what happens to Bill Clinton,'' she
said. ``It's the country and the Constitution I'm concerned
about.''


   Rep. Jim Maloney, D-Conn., is in a different bind. He is locked
in one of the toughest races of any House member, against a
challenger who has made Clinton's affair with Monica Lewinsky a
major campaign issue. Yet Maloney also believes that the majority
of his constituents are fed up with demeaning investigations into
the president.


   So while the freshman congressman could support a limited
investigation, he remains painfully uncertain about how to vote on
what may be the only alternative available to him: a Republican
plan that would allow an open-ended inquiry that he fears could
drag on for years.


   ``If we do that, we'll just be opening the door to the partisan
mischief that has been going on for so long around this place,'' he
said.


   Across Capitol Hill on Wednesday, the fence sitters in
Washington's impeachment debate were consulting constitutional
scholars, meeting with colleagues and spouses, rereading the
Federalist Papers and studying their political tea leaves,
searching for any inspiration that could help tip their mental
scales one way or the other.


   Most were preparing to follow party lines, but among that
dwindling group of undecideds are two large groups of Democrats
facing different pressures.


   On one side are people like Ms. Slaughter, who have become
deeply disaffected with Clinton, and who believe he has done little
to advance the congressional Democrats' agenda and now feel
hesitant about helping him out of his bind.


   On the other are people like Maloney, who are locked in tough
re-election fights and who are concerned that appearing soft on
Clinton will infuriate swing voters.


   ``What will I do before I decide?'' asked Rep. Bill Pascrell
Jr., D-N.J., who is also among the fence sitters. ``I'll pray. And
then I'll move on.''


   (STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   In an interview in her Capitol Hill office, Ms. Slaughter said
Clinton would not be a factor in her decision. ``He happens to be
occupying the important spot there, and I want to do what I can to
preserve the presidency,'' she said.


   But she recalled with evident disgust a phone call in August
from a White House official who was looking for ``Senator
Slaughter'' and who expressed surprise that she had an office in
Rochester. ``That's how far down the list I am, I guess,'' she
said.


   She also said Clinton's poor relations with congressional
Democrats had hurt the party's congressional candidates in 1996 and
1994. ``He didn't say this, but Dick Morris said it for him: Bill
Clinton didn't care who ran for Congress,'' she said.


   Ms. Slaughter said she was prepared in August to call on Clinton
to resign, but backed away after seeing his videotaped performance
for the grand jury. ``I thought his rights were, frankly, abridged
terribly,'' she said. ``No other human being in the United States
would have been subjected to that.''


   In recent days, Ms. Slaughter said, she had been speaking to
constitutional scholars about impeachment precedents, and meeting
with small groups of colleagues from both parties who remain
undecided. At this moment, she is leaning toward voting against an
inquiry.


   ``We're not trying to get by an election, or get by a hard spot
here,'' she said. ``What we do here has ramifications far beyond
our lives.''


   Maloney said he had been studying the report of the Whitewater
independent counsel, Kenneth Starr, reviewing Clinton's rebuttals
and videotaped testimony, talking with friends on the House
Judiciary Committee and trying to listen to constituents. The
latter group, he says, falls into three equal subgroups: those who
want the matter dropped, those who want Clinton impeached, and
those who want some lesser punishment.


   Maloney, a former state senator, represents a western
Connecticut district that was held by Republicans for many years,
including Gov. John Rowland, until Maloney wrested it from Rep.
Gary Franks in the Clinton landslide of 1996. Since then, Maloney
has tiptoed across party lines on many occasions, including to
support a Republican tax-cut plan this year.


   Maloney's Republican opponent, state Sen. Mark Nielsen, has
called on Clinton to resign, and said Wednesday that he would make
it an issue if Maloney votes against an impeachment inquiry. ``The
Congress can't turn a blind eye to President Clinton's
criminality,'' he said. ``And the congressman from the 5th District
can't be a part of the Clinton defense strategy.''


   Maloney contends that such talk only turns voters off and that a
more thoughtful approach is what will sell in November. ``I have
said this doesn't belong in politics,'' he said. ``I read the
Constitution in a given way. It isn't anything goes.''


   Maloney said he would support a six-month inquiry with
well-defined parameters, which could include the Lewinsky matter
and any other matters referred by the independent counsel. If the
House can agree to such a bipartisan plan, Maloney said, his
decision on Thursday will be easy.


   ``But that's not what I'm expecting,'' he said.



   WASHINGTON _ For all the talk of duty and Constitution, it was
not all that difficult for the House to open a formal impeachment
inquiry into President Clinton Thursday. The more troublesome
question is how Congress will bring to a conclusion the process
that Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., called ``this venture, this
excursion, this journey.''


   The conventional wisdom, which Democrats have clung to across
these tumultuous weeks for their party, is that the less impulsive
Senate will never accumulate the votes to convict Clinton, and that
inescapable fact will finally force some kind of a deal between the
president and the Republicans.


   ``The president is going to remain in office,'' pronounced Rep.
James Moran, D-Va. ``That's a foregone conclusion.''


   But conventional wisdom has often been wrong in this strange
political year dominated by Clinton's relationship with Monica
Lewinsky, and intense causes sometimes take on a life and momentum
of their own on Capitol Hill.


   Many House members _ including some Republicans _ fear that
having opened Pandora's box Thursday, they will never get it closed
again without first moving through impeachment of the president and
a Senate trial that could consume Congress for another year.


   ``It feels like it's out of control,'' said Rep. Christopher
Shays, R-Conn. ``Everything's set in motion, and I don't know how
you put it back in the box.''


   This sense of riding a runaway train could diminish if after
months of deliberations and gathering evidence, the Congress and
the country jointly come to a national conclusion that Clinton
should be impeached, tried and removed from office, like the
consensus that Richard Nixon faced when he resigned.


   The risk is that Congress could rush ahead without brakes even
as the American people continue to resist the idea that Clinton
should be ousted over the Lewinsky affair. ``This has the potential
to be the most divisive issue in American public life since the
Vietnam War,'' said Rep. Jerrold Nadler, D-N.Y.


   Two sharply different schools of thought co-exist on Capitol
Hill about how the president's fate will be determined. Which one
prevails could well be decided by the outcome of the elections just
three and a half weeks away, unless Kenneth Starr, the independent
counsel, changes all the political calculations by forwarding to
Congress new allegations of impeachable offenses.


   Under the first outcome, the Republicans make only modest gains
in November. They decide they have wrung maximum political
advantage out of Clinton's misconduct and that prolonged
impeachment hearings could hurt them going into the 2000
presidential elections. And for a brief window of time, the
pressure to appease the party's conservative base would be off.


   ``I would say now that if nothing more comes out and there is no
dramatic changes of seats in the House and the Senate, this will be
resolved short of impeachment,'' said Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y. ``If
the elections stalemate, that will be a signal from the American
people not to do impeachment, but to do something.''


   The alternate script could play out if the Republicans make
strong inroads in November. Many Republicans have already signaled
their deep belief that Clinton has committed perjury, obstructed
justice, and placed himself above the laws that he has sworn to
uphold.


   One of their loudest voices, that of the House majority whip,
accused Democrats Thursday of seeking ``the path of least
resistance. This is when we pitch the law overboard when the mood
fits,'' said Rep. Tom DeLay, R-Texas, ``when we ignore the facts in
order to cover up the truth.''


   For such Republicans an election sweep would be read as a strong
mandate to move forward with actual impeachment. And it could cause
Democratic unity to crack, putting the president in even more
jeopardy.


   Still, Democrats on Thursday were adamant that their few
defections on the inquiry vote mean that they are likely to stand
united against actual impeachment. ``If Republicans are only able
to pick off 15 percent of our members on a procedural vote three
weeks before an election, how many votes are they likely to get
four months from now on articles of impeachment?'' asked one
Democratic strategist.


   For now, the inquiry is likely to go on hold until after the
elections. Hyde said no hearings would be convened until later in
November. But battles are already brewing between the two parties
over how to conduct the investigation.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   nn


   Hyde has said he sees little reason to bring Ms. Lewinsky
forward in public hearings, but the Democrats are likely to demand
her appearance, adding to the sense of circus on Capitol Hill.


   ``You cannot have impeachment hearings where the star witness is
not called and cross-examined,'' said Rep. Martin Meehan, D-Mass.
``You have to have Monica Lewinsky testify. You have to have her
mother testify. You have to hear from Betty Currie and Vernon
Jordan.'' And Rep. John Conyers, D-Mich., the senior Democrat on
the Judiciary Committee, said Thursday that Starr would be someone
the Democrats would want in the witness chair.


   As these events move forward, Clinton's aides would dearly love
to find a way to strike a deal on some punishment short of
impeachment _ not in the Senate but before the House takes the
actual impeachment vote, according to a Democratic strategist close
to the White House.


   Clinton, who has thought so often about his legacy, is now
fighting not to become the only other president besides Andrew
Johnson to be impeached by the House. (Nixon resigned after the
House Judiciary Committee reported out three articles of
impeachment and before a House vote.)


   Gingrich is the figure in the House who would have the stature
to broker a deal, and just like Clinton, the speaker has an intense
interest in how he is perceived in history. But it is far from
clear whether the Georgia Republican _ who presided from the
speaker's chair through the entire House debate _ would have any
interest in such a role.


   He has his own personal considerations to weigh. He will be
standing for re-election as speaker when the new Congress convenes.
His relations with Clinton have ranged from furious to occasional
moments of alliance, while his relations with House Democrats have
ranged from poor to awful. In a rare bipartisan leadership meeting
over impeachment last month, he lectured House Democrats that he
would be fairer to Clinton than Democrats were to Gingrich when his
ethics troubles resulted in a House reprimand and a $300,000 fine.


   Still, one House Republican with a good antenna for the
speaker's intentions said that should the politics and timing be
right, ``I think he will try to broker a deal. He could come in at
just the right moment and show he's above it all.'' But Rich Galen,
a close associate of Gingrich's, said that if the evidence shows
that Clinton committed perjury under oath, ``I don't think the
speaker will think it's his role to get in the way of that
process.''

