
	   MARIJA BISTRICA, Croatia (AP) _ Bestowing on him the ``radiant
badge of martyrdom,'' Pope John Paul II on Saturday honored
Croatia's World War II cardinal, a hero to Roman Catholics, but
long a symbol of divisions in the Balkans.
	   Before a huge crowd spread over several muddy hillsides
overlooking Croatia's main shrine to the Virgin Mary, John Paul
beatified Cardinal Alojzije Stepinac, elevating him to the last
step before possible sainthood.
	   More than 400,000 people stood solemnly under damp trees at the
open-air site, as far as a kilometer (half-mile) from the altar.
	   John Paul appealed to a country that has suffered from war and
ethnic divisions ``to forgive and reconcile and to purify one's
memory of hatred'' and ``the desire for revenge.''
	   The pope said Stepinac ``having endured in his own body and his
own spirit the atrocities of the communist system is now entrusted
to the memory of his fellow countrymen with the radiant badge of
martyrdom.''
	   Stepinac was hailed as a hero by Catholics for his resistance to
communism and refusal to separate the Croatian church from the
Vatican. But his beatification, the last step before possible
sainthood, is controversial because many Serbs and Jews accuse him
of sympathizing with the Nazis.
	   While serving as Zagreb's archbishop in 1941, Stepinac supported
Croatia's German-backed fascist puppet government led by dictator
Ante Pavelic. By 1942, however, Stepinac denounced the regime's
genocidal policies, which led to the extermination of thousands of
Serbs, Jews, Gypsies and Croat opponents.
	   He died at 62 in 1960 while under house arrest following his
conviction on charges of collaborating with the Nazis. Stepinac's
own notes and recent studies say he spoke out against the
atrocities, and worked to save lives, but many Serbs still consider
him a war criminal.
	   The Simon Wiesenthal Center, a U.S.-based Nazi-hunting group,
also had asked the Vatican to postpone the beatification pending
further study of the cardinal's actions, although some local Jews
defended Stepinac.
	   John Paul addressed the criticism in his homily, quoting from a
1943 address by the cardinal condemning injustices and the killing
of innocents. He said Stepinac's figure summed up ``the whole
tragedy which befell the Croatian people and Europe in the course
of this century marked by the three great evils of fascism,
national socialism and communism.''
	   ``He is now in the joy of heaven, surrounded by those who, like
him, fought the good fight, purifying their faith in the crucible
of suffering,'' said John Paul, speaking from an altar before a
5-meter (15-foot) high portrait of Stepinac.
	   The pope, who battled communism in his own Polish homeland,
stressed Stepinac's treatment by Yugoslavia's communist regime
after the war, saying the last 15 years of his life ``were a
continual succession of trials.''
	   Some 80 percent of Croatia's 4.7 million population is Catholic,
and the Vatican looks at the country as a Catholic bastion in the
Balkans, amid Orthodox Christians and Muslims.
	   Stipe Dorotic, a 38-year electrician from eastern Croatia, who
attended the ceremony said hoped that the beatification ``will
enable Croats to face the future with more confidence and faith.''
	   Croatia was a part of communist-run Yugoslavia until 1991, when
it proclaimed independence. The Vatican was one of the first states
to recognize its independence.
	   The secession of Croatia, and later of neighboring Bosnia, led
to bloody wars in which tens of thousands of people were killed.
	   It is John Paul's second visit to Croatia, following a 1994
pilgrimage. He flew to Sarajevo last year, realizing his desire to
pay tribute to those who suffered during the war.
	   He also toured Slovenia in the former Yugoslavia, but has not
been to Serbia, apparently because of resistance from Orthodox
leaders.
	   (vls/me/eb/sv)

	   MARIJA BISTRICA, Croatia (AP) _ Bestowing on him the ``radiant
badge of martyrdom,'' Pope John Paul II on Saturday honored
Croatia's World War II cardinal, a hero to Roman Catholics, but
long a symbol of divisions in the Balkans.
	   Before a huge crowd spread over several muddy hillsides
overlooking Croatia's main shrine to the Virgin Mary, John Paul
beatified Cardinal Alojzije Stepinac, elevating him to the last
step before possible sainthood.
	   More than 400,000 people stood solemnly under damp trees at the
open-air site, as far as a kilometer (half-mile) from the altar.
	   John Paul appealed to a country that has suffered from war and
ethnic divisions ``to forgive and reconcile and to purify one's
memory of hatred'' and ``the desire for revenge.''
	   The pope said Stepinac ``having endured in his own body and his
own spirit the atrocities of the communist system is now entrusted
to the memory of his fellow countrymen with the radiant badge of
martyrdom.''
	   Stepinac was hailed as a hero by Catholics for his resistance to
communism and refusal to separate the Croatian church from the
Vatican. But his beatification, the last step before possible
sainthood, is controversial because many Serbs and Jews accuse him
of sympathizing with the Nazis.
	   While serving as Zagreb's archbishop in 1941, Stepinac supported
Croatia's German-backed puppet government led by dictator Ante
Pavelic. By 1942, however, Stepinac denounced the regime's
genocidal policies, which led to the extermination of thousands of
Serbs, Jews, Gypsies and Croat opponents.
	   He died at 62 in 1960 while under house arrest following his
conviction on charges of collaborating with the Nazis. Stepinac's
own notes and recent studies say he spoke out against the
atrocities, and worked to save lives, but many Serbs still consider
him a war criminal.
	   The Simon Wiesenthal Center, a U.S.-based Nazi-hunting group,
also had asked the Vatican to postpone the beatification pending
further study of the cardinal's actions, although some local Jews
defended Stepinac.
	   John Paul addressed the criticism in his homily, quoting from a
1943 address by the cardinal condemning injustices and the killing
of innocents. He said Stepinac's figure summed up ``the whole
tragedy which befell the Croatian people and Europe in the course
of this century marked by the three great evils of fascism,
national socialism and communism.''
	   ``He is now in the joy of heaven, surrounded by those who, like
him, fought the good fight, purifying their faith in the crucible
of suffering,'' said John Paul, speaking from an altar before a
5-meter (15-foot) high portrait of Stepinac.
	   The pope, who battled communism in his own Polish homeland,
stressed Stepinac's treatment by Yugoslavia's communist regime
after the war, saying the last 15 years of his life ``were a
continual succession of trials.''
	   Some 80 percent of Croatia's 4.7 million population is Catholic,
and the Vatican looks at the country as a Catholic bastion in the
Balkans, amid Orthodox Christians and Muslims.
	   Stipe Dorotic, a 38-year electrician from eastern Croatia, who
attended the ceremony said hoped that the beatification ``will
enable Croats to face the future with more confidence and faith.''
	   Croatia was a part of communist-run Yugoslavia until 1991, when
it proclaimed independence. The Vatican was one of the first states
to recognize its independence.
	   The secession of Croatia, and later of neighboring Bosnia, led
to bloody wars in which tens of thousands of people were killed.
	   It is John Paul's second visit to Croatia, following a 1994
pilgrimage. He flew to Sarajevo last year, realizing his desire to
pay tribute to those who suffered during the war.
	   He also toured Slovenia in the former Yugoslavia, but has not
been to Serbia, apparently because of resistance from Orthodox
leaders. 	   

	   MARIJA BISTRICA, Croatia (AP) _ Declaring him a martyr of the
faith, Pope John Paul II on Saturday honored Croatia's World War II
cardinal, a hero to Roman Catholics, but long a symbol of divisions
in the Balkans.
	   Half a million od people watched with delight and gratitude as
John Paul beatified Cardinal Alojzije Stepinac, elevating him to
the last step before possible sainthood, in Marija Bistrica,
Croatia's leading Marian shrine to the Virgin Mary.
	   John Paul appealed to a country that has suffered from war and
ethnic divisions ``to forgive and reconcile and to purify one's
memory of hatred'' and ``the desire for revenge.''
	   The pope said Stepinac ``having endured in his own body and his
own spirit the atrocities of the communist system is now entrusted
to the memory of his fellow countrymen with the radiant badge of
martyrdom.''
	   Stepinac was hailed as a hero by Catholics for his resistance to
communism and refusal to separate the Croatian church from the
Vatican. But his beatification, the last step before possible
sainthood, is controversial because many Serbs and Jews accuse him
of sympathizing with the Nazis.
	   While serving as Zagreb's archbishop in 1941, Stepinac supported
Croatia's German-backed fascist puppet government led by dictator
Ante Pavelic. By 1942, however, Stepinac denounced the regime's
genocidal policies, which led to the extermination of thousands of
Serbs, Jews, Gypsies and Croat opponents.
	   He died at 62 in 1960 while under house arrest following his
conviction on charges of collaborating with the Nazis. Stepinac's
own notes and recent studies say he spoke out against the
atrocities, and worked to save lives, but many Serbs still consider
him a war criminal.
	   The Simon Wiesenthal Center, a U.S.-based Nazi-hunting group,
also had asked the Vatican to postpone the beatification pending
further study of the cardinal's actions, although some local Jews
defended Stepinac.
	   John Paul addressed the criticism in his homily, quoting from a
1943 address by the cardinal condemning injustices and the killing
of innocents. He said Stepinac's figure summed up ``the whole
tragedy which befell the Croatian people and Europe in the course
of this century marked by the three great evils of fascism,
national socialism and communism.''
	   ``He is now in the joy of heaven, surrounded by those who, like
him, fought the good fight, purifying their faith in the crucible
of suffering,'' said John Paul, speaking from an altar before a
5-meter (15-foot) high portrait of Stepinac.
	   A silver box, containing a relict of the new church blessed _ a
finger _ was placed under the portrait.
	   The pope, who battled communism in his own Polish homeland,
stressed Stepinac's treatment by Yugoslavia's communist regime
after the war, saying the last 15 years of his life ``were a
continual succession of trials.''
	   Some 80 percent of Croatia's 4.7 million population is Catholic,
and the Vatican looks at the country as a Catholic bastion in the
Balkans, amid Orthodox Christians and Muslims.
	   Stipe Dorotic, a 38-year electrician from eastern Croatia, who
attended the ceremony said hoped that the beatification ``will
enable Croats to face the future with more confidence and faith.''
	   Croatia was a part of communist-run Yugoslavia until 1991, when
it proclaimed independence. The Vatican was one of the first states
to recognize its independence.
	   The secession of Croatia, and later of neighboring Bosnia, led
to bloody wars in which tens of thousands of people were killed.
	   It is John Paul's second visit to Croatia, following a 1994
pilgrimage. He flew to Sarajevo last year, realizing his desire to
pay tribute to those who suffered during the war.
	   He also toured Slovenia in the former Yugoslavia, but has not
been to Serbia, apparently because of resistance from Orthodox
leaders.
	   (vls/sv/me)

	   MARIJA BISTRICA, Croatia (AP) _ Declaring him a martyr of the
faith, Pope John Paul II on Saturday honored Croatia's World War II
cardinal, a hero to Roman Catholics, but long a symbol of divisions
in the Balkans.
	   Half a million od people watched with delight and gratitude as
John Paul beatified Cardinal Alojzije Stepinac, elevating him to
the last step before possible sainthood, in Marija Bistrica,
Croatia's leading Marian shrine to the Virgin Mary.
	   John Paul appealed to a country that has suffered from war and
ethnic divisions ``to forgive and reconcile and to purify one's
memory of hatred'' and ``the desire for revenge.''
	   The pope said Stepinac ``having endured in his own body and his
own spirit the atrocities of the communist system is now entrusted
to the memory of his fellow countrymen with the radiant badge of
martyrdom.''
	   Stepinac was hailed as a hero by Catholics for his resistance to
communism and refusal to separate the Croatian church from the
Vatican. But his beatification, the last step before possible
sainthood, is controversial because many Serbs and Jews accuse him
of sympathizing with the Nazis.
	   While serving as Zagreb's archbishop in 1941, Stepinac supported
Croatia's German-backed fascist puppet government led by dictator
Ante Pavelic. By 1942, however, Stepinac denounced the regime's
genocidal policies, which led to the extermination of thousands of
Serbs, Jews, Gypsies and Croat opponents.
	   He died at 62 in 1960 while under house arrest following his
conviction on charges of collaborating with the Nazis. Stepinac's
own notes and recent studies say he spoke out against the
atrocities, and worked to save lives, but many Serbs still consider
him a war criminal.
	   The Simon Wiesenthal Center, a U.S.-based Nazi-hunting group,
also had asked the Vatican to postpone the beatification pending
further study of the cardinal's actions, although some local Jews
defended Stepinac.
	   John Paul addressed the criticism in his homily, quoting from a
1943 address by the cardinal condemning injustices and the killing
of innocents. He said Stepinac's figure summed up ``the whole
tragedy which befell the Croatian people and Europe in the course
of this century marked by the three great evils of fascism,
national socialism and communism.''
	   ``He is now in the joy of heaven, surrounded by those who, like
him, fought the good fight, purifying their faith in the crucible
of suffering,'' said John Paul, speaking from an altar before a
5-meter (15-foot) high portrait of Stepinac.
	   A silver box, containing a relict of the new church blessed _ a
finger _ was placed under the portrait.
	   The pope, who battled communism in his own Polish homeland,
stressed Stepinac's treatment by Yugoslavia's communist regime
after the war, saying the last 15 years of his life ``were a
continual succession of trials.''
	   Some 80 percent of Croatia's 4.7 million population is Catholic,
and the Vatican looks at the country as a Catholic bastion in the
Balkans, amid Orthodox Christians and Muslims.
	   Stipe Dorotic, a 38-year electrician from eastern Croatia, who
attended the ceremony said hoped that the beatification ``will
enable Croats to face the future with more confidence and faith.''
	   Croatia was a part of communist-run Yugoslavia until 1991, when
it proclaimed independence. The Vatican was one of the first states
to recognize its independence.
	   The secession of Croatia, and later of neighboring Bosnia, led
to bloody wars in which tens of thousands of people were killed.
	   It is John Paul's second visit to Croatia, following a 1994
pilgrimage. He flew to Sarajevo last year, realizing his desire to
pay tribute to those who suffered during the war.
	   He also toured Slovenia in the former Yugoslavia, but has not
been to Serbia, apparently because of resistance from Orthodox
leaders.
	   (vls/sv/me)

	   MARIJA BISTRICA, Croatia (AP) _ Declaring him a martyr of the
faith, Pope John Paul II on Saturday honored Croatia's World War II
cardinal, a hero to Roman Catholics, but long a symbol of divisions
in the Balkans.
	   Half a million people watched with delight and gratitude as John
Paul beatified Cardinal Alojzije Stepinac, elevating him to the
last step before possible sainthood, in Marija Bistrica, Croatia's
leading shrine to the Virgin Mary.
	   John Paul appealed to a country that has suffered from war and
ethnic divisions ``to forgive and reconcile and to purify one's
memory of hatred'' and ``the desire for revenge.''
	   The pope said Stepinac ,''having endured in his own body and his
own spirit the atrocities of the communist system, is now entrusted
to the memory of his fellow countrymen with the radiant badge of
martyrdom.''
	   Later Saturday, the pontiff met Croatian President Franjo
Tudjman at his palace in the capital Zagreb. Government officials
and foreign ambassadors, including Veljko Knezevic, the ambassador
of Serb-led Yugoslavia, were also present to greet John Paul.
	    &UR; Stepinac was, 5th graf, pvs.
	   (pvs/sv/ )

	   SPLIT, Croatia (AP) _ On a sun-basked seaside packed with
pilgrims, Pope John Paul II sought Sunday to heal the wounds left
by war and totalitarian rule, urging a renewal of values in
Croatian society.
	   Hundreds of thousands of Roman Catholics jammed a beach outside
this Adriatic coastal city for John Paul's final Mass of the
three-day trip to Croatia. Scores of fishing and pleasure boats
anchored off shore sounded their sirens when the pope arrived from
Zagreb.
	   Adding to the numbers were Croat pilgrims from Montenegro, who
streamed in when the border crossing was opened Saturday night for
the first time since civil war ended in 1995, state-run Croatian
television reported.
	   ``Croats are today called to give a new face to their country,
above all by committing themselves to the renewal in society of the
ethical and moral values undermined by past totalitarianism and by
the recent violence of war,'' John Paul said.
	   ``It is an urgent task, for without values there can be no true
freedom or democracy.''
	   The need for reconciliation and a renewal of values has been
high on the pope's agenda during his stay. The breakup of
Yugoslavia sparked a civil war in 1991 that left over 10,000 dead
and thousands missing before the 1995 Dayton Accords ended the
fighting.
	   Split was untouched by the fighting, but Zadar, Sibenik and
Dubrovnik along the Dalmatian Coast were both heavily damaged.
Dubrovnik suffered damage to some of its art and cultural
treasures.
	   The pope mentioned this in his homily. ``The eye of man can no
longer rejoice in them,'' he said of losses to architectural
masterpieces. ``How can we not feel regret for this?''
	   Some 80 percent of Croatia's 4.7 million population is Catholic,
and the Vatican looks at the country as a Catholic bastion in the
Balkans, amid Orthodox Christians in Serbia and Muslims in Bosnia.
	   For most Croats, the highlight of the pope's three-day visit was
Saturday's beatification of the controversial World War II
cardinal, Alojzije Stepinac. Roman Catholics hail Stepinac as a
martyr, but many Serbs and Jews accuse him of sympathizing with the
Nazis.
	   Beatification is the last step before possible sainthood.
	   (vls/gj)

	   SPLIT, Croatia (AP) _ On a sun-basked seaside packed with
pilgrims, Pope John Paul II sought Sunday to heal the wounds left
by war and totalitarian rule, urging a renewal in Croatian society.
	   Hundreds of thousands of Roman Catholics jammed a beach outside
this Adriatic coastal city for John Paul's final Mass of the
three-day trip to Croatia. Scores of fishing and pleasure boats
anchored off shore sounded their sirens when the pope arrived from
Zagreb.
	   Adding to the numbers were Croat pilgrims from Montenegro, who
streamed in when the border crossing was opened Saturday night for
the first time since war ended in 1995, state-run Croatian
television reported.
	   ``Croats are today called to give a new face to their country,
above all by committing themselves to the renewal in society of the
ethical and moral values undermined by past totalitarianism and by
the recent violence of war,'' John Paul said.
	   ``It is an urgent task, for without values there can be no true
freedom or democracy.''
	   Reconciliation and the renewal of values have been high on the
pope's agenda during his stay. The breakup of Yugoslavia sparked a
civil war in 1991 that left over 10,000 dead and thousands missing
before the 1995 Dayton Accords ended the fighting.
	   Split was untouched by the fighting, but Zadar, Sibenik and
Dubrovnik along the Dalmatian Coast were both heavily damaged.
Dubrovnik suffered damage to some of its art and cultural
treasures.
	   The pope mentioned this in his homily. ``The eye of man can no
longer rejoice in them,'' he said of losses to architectural
masterpieces. ``How can we not feel regret for this?''
	   Some 80 percent of Croatia's 4.7 million population is Catholic,
and the Vatican looks at the country as a Catholic bastion in the
Balkans, amid Orthodox Christians in Serbia and Muslims in Bosnia.
	   For most Croats, the highlight of the pope's three-day visit was
Saturday's beatification of the controversial World War II
cardinal, Alojzije Stepinac. Roman Catholics hail Stepinac as a
martyr, but many Serbs and Jews accuse him of sympathizing with the
Nazis.
	   Beatification is the last step before possible sainthood. 	   


   MARIJA BISTRICA, Croatia _ Hailing the World War II archbishop
of Zagreb as a martyr to ``the atrocities of the communist
system,'' Pope John Paul II beatified him on Saturday.


   Beatification is the final step before sainthood. But by paying
such homage to Cardinal Alojzije Stepinac, who was imprisoned by
the Tito regime as a Nazi collaborator, the pope also stepped into
one of the most divisive Serbo-Croatian disputes in all the
embattled regions of the former Yugoslavia.


   Stepinac is a national hero to millions of Roman Catholic
Croats, and to Croatia's nationalist president, Franjo Tudjman. To
Orthodox Serbs, who formed a minority in Croatia for centuries but
have largely left or been driven from Tudjman's state, the
beatification is a political provocation. They have long viewed
Stepinac as a wartime sympathizer with the pro-Nazi puppet regime
that killed tens, even hundreds, of thousands of Serbs, Jews and
Gypsies _ a regime that many here see as the precursor of today's
independent state.


   In his pastoral visit to Croatia, the ailing 78-year-old pope,
who has been in office 20 years this month, seems to be viewing
history through a different prism than the peoples he says he wants
to reconcile. It is perhaps not surprising that the Polish-born
John Paul, who used his pulpit to help topple Soviet
totalitarianism, would revere a church leader who was persecuted by
the Communists and died under house arrest in 1960.


   But in post-communist Croatia, it has been a long time since
religion was viewed as a bulwark against an atheist oppressor. As
one of the few tangible differences between Serbs, Croats and
Muslims, religion has for the last 10 years been a main ingredient
of the nationalist hatreds that have fed their war.


   Among the more than 350,000 believers who crowded on a steep,
damp hill in front of the pope's outdoor altar, people expressed
pride in the beatification and defiance of its critics. ``It is
good to have a saint of our own, someone to speak to God for us,''
said Kruno Cabraka, 20, a Zagreb student who arrived in Marija
Bistrica at 2 a.m. to secure a glimpse of the pope. He shrugged off
the complaints of minorities: ``We don't care about their saints.
Why should they care about ours?''


   John Paul has not visited Orthodox Serbia but has made several
trips to other regions of the former Yugoslavia, always preaching
peace and unity in an area brutally torn by ethnic and religious
differences. In 1994 he made his first visit to Croatia, which is
more than 75 percent Catholic and which lost a third of its
territory to the Serbs after it broke away from Yugoslavia in a
1991 war. Earlier this year, the United Nations returned control of
Eastern Slavonia _ the last Serb-dominated area in Croatia _ to the
Tudjman government. But tensions there remain high.


   The Orthodox Church is unforgiving of what it sees as the
Catholic Church's complicity in the systematic murder, eviction or
forced conversion of Serbs during World War II. Under the
authoritarian leadership of Tudjman, moreover, many Croats are
recasting the pro-Nazi Ustashe as patriots and founding fathers of
the modern Croatian state.


   The rehabilitation of Stepinac strikes a raw nerve at the heart
of this revisionism. After Germany invaded Yugoslavia in 1941, Ante
Pavelic led a pro-Nazi dictatorship that controlled a newly
independent Croatia. The archbishop of Zagreb, a fervent
anti-communist, initially embraced the Pavelic government as
``God's hand at work.''


   But as evidence mounted of atrocities against Serbs, Jews and
other minorities, the archbishop withdrew his support. By 1942 he
began denouncing Ustashe excesses, once in a letter to Pavelic and,
in 1943, in church homilies and letters to priests. Arrested by
Tito's forces in 1946, the archbishop was given a show trial,
imprisoned and released under house arrest in 1951. Pope Pius XII
later made him cardinal.


   The Vatican and many historians credit him with saving hundreds
of Jewish and Serbian lives, but his critics maintain that by not
speaking out more, he condoned and effectively supported the
Ustashe regime. To Serbs he has long been a symbol of the many
Catholic priests who cooperated with the Ustashe.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   John Paul II, who has canonized more than 270 people and
beatified close to 800, has made more saints than any other pope in
history. The cause of Stepinac is one of the most controversial to
date.


   A week before he left Rome, the Simon Wiesenthal Center in Paris
asked the Vatican to delay beatification of Stepinac until
historians could give the case further study. The intervention
infuriated Croatian officials as well as the Vatican. In Croatia,
the Jewish community expressed resignation.


   ``There is no question he saved hundreds of Jews and others,''
said Slavko Goldstein, leader of the Jewish community in Croatia,
which numbers about 2,000. He described the cardinal's record as
mixed. ``He tried to correct some of the worst aspects, but he
never condemned the regime as such,'' Goldstein said.


   He expressed regret that the beatification _ linked entirely to
the cardinal's resistance to communism _ was unlikely to prompt
Croats to examine a wartime past clouded in myth. ``This will not
clarify the period of World War II,'' Goldstein added. ``Croatian
society has yet to deal with something that Germans have dealt with
successfully.''


   The pope seemed indirectly to address some of the questions that
the beatification has raised. ``Blessed Alojzije Stepinac did not
shed his blood in the strict sense of the word,'' he said, alluding
to the fact that martyrs are usually slain by their persecutors.
``His death was caused by the long suffering he endured.''


   He also made a veiled reference to the speed with which the
Croatian church leader had been beatified, a process that in many
cases can take centuries. ``Very little time separates us from the
life and death of Cardinal Stepinac,'' John Paul said, ``barely 38
years. We all know the context of this death: a continual
succession of trials.''


   The beatification may also owe its speed to the pope's fear that
a successor may be less sensitive to the East European Church's
struggle against communism, to which he has devoted much of his
life.



   MARIJA BISTRICA, Croatia _ Hailing the World War II archbishop
of Zagreb as a martyr to ``the atrocities of the Communist
system,'' Pope John Paul II beatified him Saturday.


   Beatification is the final step before sainthood. But by paying
such homage to Cardinal Alojzije Stepinac, who was imprisoned by
the Tito government as a Nazi collaborator, the pope also stepped
into one of the most divisive Serbian-Croatian disputes in all of
former Yugoslavia.


   Stepinac is a national hero to millions of Roman Catholic
Croats, and to Croatia's nationalist president, Franjo Tudjman. To
Orthodox Serbs, who formed a minority in Croatia for centuries but
have largely left or been driven from Tudjman's state, the
beatification is a political provocation. They have long viewed
Stepinac as a wartime sympathizer with the pro-Nazi puppet regime
that killed tens, perhaps hundreds, of thousands of Serbs, Jews and
Gypsies _ a regime that many here see as the precursor of today's
independent state.


   In his pastoral visit to Croatia, the ailing 78-year-old pope,
who has been in office 20 years this month, seems to be viewing
history through a different prism than the peoples he says he wants
to reconcile. It is perhaps not surprising that the Polish-born
John Paul, who used his pulpit to help topple Soviet
totalitarianism, would revere a church leader who was persecuted by
the Communists and died under house arrest in 1960.


   But in post-Communist Croatia, it has been a long time since
religion was viewed as a bulwark against an atheist oppressor. As
one of the few tangible differences between Serbs, Croats and
Muslims, religion has for the last 10 years been a main ingredient
of the nationalist hatreds that have fed their war.


   Among the more than 350,000 believers who crowded onto a steep
hill in front of the pope's outdoor altar, there was pride in the
beatification and defiance of its critics. ``It is good to have a
saint of our own, someone to speak to God for us,'' said Kruno
Cabraka, 20, a Zagreb student who came north to Marija Bistrica,
arriving at 2 a.m. to ensure that he would catch a glimpse of the
pope. He shrugged off the complaints of minorities: ``We don't care
about their saints. Why should they care about ours?''


   Pope John Paul has not visited Orthodox Serbia, but he has made
several trips to Balkan sites, always preaching peace and unity in
an area torn by ethnic and religious differences. In 1994 he made
his first visit to Croatia, which is more than 75 percent Catholic
and which lost a third of its land to the Serbs in 1991.


   The Orthodox Church is unforgiving of what it sees as the
Catholic Church's complicity in the systematic killing, eviction or
forced conversion of Serbs during World War II. Under Tudjman,
moreover, many Croats are recasting the pro-Nazi Ustashe, who were
led by Ante Pavelic, as patriots and founding fathers of the modern
Croatian state.


   The beatification of Stepinac strikes a raw nerve at the heart
of this history. After Germany invaded Yugoslavia in 1941, Pavelic
led a pro-Nazi dictatorship that controlled a newly independent
Croatia. The archbishop of Zagreb, a fervent anti-Communist,
initially embraced the Pavelic government as ``God's hand at
work.''


   But as evidence mounted of atrocities against Serbs, Jews and
other minorities, the archbishop withdrew his support. By 1942 he
began denouncing Ustashe excesses, once in a letter to Pavelic and,
in 1943, in church homilies and letters to priests. Arrested by
Tito's forces in 1946, the archbishop was given a show trial,
jailed and put under house arrest in 1951. Pope Pius XII later made
him a cardinal.


   The Vatican and many historians credit him with saving hundreds
of Jews and Serbs, but his critics maintain that by not speaking
out more, he in effect supported the Ustashe regime. To Serbs he
has long been a symbol of Catholic priests' cooperation with the
Ustashe.


   A week before the pope left Rome, the Simon Wiesenthal Center in
Paris asked the Vatican to delay beatification of the cardinal
until historians could give the case further study. The request
infuriated Croatian officials as well as the Vatican. In Croatia,
Jews expressed resignation.


   ``There is no question he saved hundreds of Jews and others,''
said Slavko Goldstein, leader of the Jews in Croatia, who number
about 2,000. He described the cardinal's record as mixed. ``He
tried to correct some of the worst aspects, but he never condemned
the regime as such,'' Goldstein said.


   He expressed regret that the beatification _ linked entirely to
the cardinal's resistance to Communism _ was unlikely to prompt
Croats to examine a wartime past clouded in myth. ``This will not
clarify the period of World War II,'' Goldstein added. ``Croatian
society has yet to deal with something that Germans have dealt with
successfully.''



   SPLIT, Croatia _ At a seaside mass here Pope John Paul II called
for reconciliation throughout the former Yugoslavia and urged the
world to do more for the victims of the Balkan war that ended not
long ago in Croatia and that has most recently raged in Kosovo.


   ``How could we not recall with anxious concern the continuing
tragedy taking place in nearby Kosovo?'' the pope asked from a vast
podium built to look like a ship's prow before hundreds of
thousands of believers squeezed along the shore and onto boats
bobbing in the water. ``May understanding, mutual respect,
forgiveness and reconciliation at last take the place of violence
and destruction.''


   He urged the international community to ``not fail to provide
its timely help.''


   The pope's visit was joyously welcomed by Croats and the
nationalist government of President Franjo Tudjman. Tudjman's
popularity has waned even among Catholics under his strong-armed
leadership and the country's economic and social troubles. The
archbishop of Zagreb, Monsignor Josip Bozanic, 49, who was
appointed a year ago, has frequently spoken out against corruption
in the government and other failings.


   The Croatian president took every opportunity to place himself
at the pope's side during the three-day visit. He had a private
audience on Saturday afternoon in his residential palace in Zagreb,
a modernist glass-and-brick house built for Tito in the 1950s.


   But the pope did not give his host a blank check. At the mass,
and later in his farewell remarks at the airport, John Paul II
rather pointedly called on Croats to make ``society and its civil
institutions more democratic'' in a country that is rarely
described as open and free.


   ``After long years of dictatorship and the terrible experiences
of violence which the peoples of this region have undergone,'' the
pontiff said at the airport, ``it is now necessary to make every
effort to construct a democracy based on the moral values inscribed
in the very nature of the human being.''


   For much of the visit, however, the pope's attention was focused
on another, more remote conflict, namely the Catholic Church's
struggle against Communism during the Cold War, which the
Polish-born pope experienced first-hand. The pope arrived in
Croatia, a country of 4 million that is more than 75 percent
Catholic, on Friday to beatify one of Croatia's national heros,
Cardinal Alojzije Stepinac, who was persecuted by Tito after World
War II and died under house arrest in 1960.


   Beatification is the final step before sainthood, and the homage
was highly controversial. Though many historians say that Stepinac
helped save the lives of hundreds of Jews and others during the
war, he was tried as a Nazi collaborator by the Communists. He is
still viewed by Orthodox Serbs as the symbol of the Croatian
Catholic Church's complicity with the Ustashe, the World War II
fascist regime that killed tens, if not hundreds, of thousands of
Serbs, Jews and other minorities.


   The Tudjman government has sought to rehabilitate the Ustashe
regime as the founder of the modern, independent Croatian state.
Croatia's centuries-old Serbian minority has mostly left or been
driven out of Tudjman's state.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   In 1994, when the pope made his first papal visit to Croatia,
the country was still in the throes of a war started when Croatia
broke away from Yugoslavia in 1991 and lost a third of its
territory to Serbs. Earlier this year, the United Nations returned
control of the last Serb-dominated area in Croatia, Eastern
Slavonia, to the Croatian government. Prosperity has not yet
returned along with the fragile peace.


   As the pope lamented Croatia's tragic past and uncertain
present, he also reminded Catholics not to follow the West too
closely in its search for a better future. At a meeting with the
Croatian Bishop's Conference after the Sunday mass, John Paul II
reminded Croatian church leaders to keep followers in line.


   ``Today, in the new democratic climate, it is necessary to give
strong support to the new evangelization, so that the human person,
the family and society as a whole will not be harmed and fall into
the trap of consumerism and hedonism'' the pope said.

