

   Dr. Barnett Slepian, an obstetrician with a practice in suburban
Buffalo, N.Y., returned home from synagogue Friday night with his
wife, Lynn, and greeted his four sons. Then he stepped into his
kitchen, where a sniper's bullet crashed through a back window and
struck him in the chest, police said.


   He fell to the floor, calling for help, but he would die within
two hours.


   Slepian was one of a handful of doctors who provide abortions in
the Buffalo area, and law-enforcement officials said Saturday that
his slaying was the most deadly example of what they described as
an annual pattern of anti-abortion violence in Canada and western
New York. Slepian had endured years of picketing and harassment,
and earlier on Friday he had received a warning about possible
attacks against abortion providers.


   Slepian, 51, is the third abortion doctor killed in the United
States since 1993. In the past four years, three Canadian doctors
and a doctor in Rochester, N.Y., all of whom performed abortions,
have been wounded by snipers. Each of the shootings occurred within
a few weeks of Nov. 11, Veteran's Day, also known as Remembrance
Day in Canada.


   President Clinton said Saturday that he was ``outraged'' by
Slepian's slaying and that the Justice Department was working with
local authorities to track down his killer.


   New York Gov. George Pataki said the killer should face the
death penalty.


   ``It's beyond a tragedy _ it's really an act of terrorism and,
in my mind, a cold-blooded assassination,'' Pataki said in Buffalo.


   Susan Ward, a spokeswoman for Buffalo GYN Women's Services, the
private clinic where Slepian performed abortions, said the National
Abortion Federation had faxed a warning to the clinic Friday
morning reminding them about the four-year pattern of attacks. Ms.
Ward said the fax was sent to Slepian at his private office in
Amherst.


   ``He was aware of the threat,'' she said. ``Around this time of
year, there had been shootings.''


   Amherst police said the timing of the shootings was not the only
similarity. In each case, police said a gunman, using a
high-powered rifle, fired through a window into the home of the
doctors. Last November, a doctor in Winnipeg, Manitoba, was shot in
the shoulder by a bullet fired through a window.


   Assistant Police Chief Frank Olesko said local investigators as
well as FBI agents and Canadian authorities were looking at the
possibility that the same gunman could be responsible for all of
the shootings. A task force of several Canadian and U.S. law
enforcement agencies has been investigating the attacks for more
than a year.


   National abortion-rights advocates expressed concern that the
slaying signaled a renewed escalation of violence against abortion
providers.


   The gunman who shot Slepian apparently hid in a strip of woods
behind the house, then fired a single shot from a high-powered
rifle, Olesko said. Local police, FBI agents and Canadian
investigators searched the woods Saturday, but the identity and
whereabouts of the suspect remained unknown.


   Shalom Press, another Amherst abortion provider who had known
Slepian for years, said, ``He believed women had the right to have
an abortion, and he followed his conscience.''


   The slaying comes more than six years after anti-abortion
protesters descended on Buffalo. In April 1992, the city was the
setting for a coordinated series of ``Spring of Life'' protests led
by members of the anti-abortion group Operation Rescue. Nearly 200
protesters were arrested during one demonstration, and
abortion-rights groups held counter protests. Police said Slepian
was one of the doctors singled out by picketers.


   In interviews with The Buffalo News, Slepian said he took the
rhetoric of abortion opponents seriously.


   In April 1993, one month after the shooting death of a
Pensacola, Fla., abortion provider, David Gunn, Slepian spoke about
the vulnerability of doctors who provide abortions.


   ``It probably hits home a little bit because it could have been
me,'' Slepian told The Buffalo News. ``For years I've felt, and I
still feel, it could happen to me or to someone around here.''


   And in 1995, he told The News: ``When you're using words like
`kill' and `murder,' that's where it can lead. If the
rosary-holding churchgoers and the bishop don't think that's true,
they're fooling themselves.''


   In 1988, Slepian had clashed with anti-abortion protesters
outside his home. Protesters had taunted him during the Jewish
holiday of Hanukkah, calling him a ``murderer.'' One protester
later claimed that Slepian had attacked him with a baseball bat,
though the case was later settled.


   Slepian divided his practice between the clinic in Buffalo and
his private office in Amherst. Ms. Ward, the clinic spokeswoman,
said he had worked at that and other clinics for 15 years.


   ``He has been harassed right in front of his house,'' she said.
``His children have been harassed.'' She called him a courageous
man who followed his principles.


   A woman from Attica, N.Y., who identified herself only as Susan,
stood outside his Amherst office Saturday, weeping. She said
Slepian should not be portrayed solely as an ``abortion doctor.''
She said he had delivered her niece and her daughter and that he
kept a photo album of the hundreds of babies that he had delivered.


   ``To me, he was about babies, not abortion,'' Susan said. She
said she had gone to him every three months for the past four years
for treatment of cervical cancer. ``I feel he saved my life. I feel
he is like a member of my family.''


   In Slepian's affluent Amherst neighborhood of large homes, there
was a sense of shock that this protected world could be violated.
The slogan on Amherst police cars reads, ``Safest Town in
America.''


   ``Every once in a while,'' said David Guercio, 49, a neighbor
walking by the Slepian home Saturday, ``we get a pumpkin smashed
around here, but that's about it.''


   Another neighbor, Neel Chary, said Slepian's four sons had told
him of a horrible scene. ``They just went into a panic,'' Chary
said. ``The oldest one called the grandpa and said, `Grandpa,
Grandpa, Dad's been shot.'''



   Dr. Barnett Slepian, an obstetrician with a practice in suburban
Buffalo, N.Y., returned home from synagogue Friday night with his
wife, Lynn, and greeted his four sons. Then he stepped into his
kitchen, where a sniper's bullet crashed through a back window and
struck him in the chest, police said.


   He fell to the floor, calling for help, but he would die within
two hours.


   Slepian was one of a handful of doctors who provide abortions in
the Buffalo area, and law-enforcement officials said Saturday that
his slaying was the most deadly example of what they described as
an annual pattern of anti-abortion violence in Canada and western
New York. Slepian had endured years of picketing and harassment,
and earlier on Friday he had received a warning about possible
attacks against abortion providers.


   Slepian, 51, is the third abortion doctor killed in the United
States since 1993. In the past four years, three Canadian doctors
and a doctor in Rochester, N.Y., all of whom performed abortions,
have been wounded by snipers. Each of the shootings occurred within
a few weeks of Nov. 11, Veteran's Day, also known as Remembrance
Day in Canada.


   President Clinton said Saturday that he was ``outraged'' by
Slepian's slaying and that the Justice Department was working with
local authorities to track down his killer.


   New York Gov. George Pataki said the killer should face the
death penalty.


   ``It's beyond a tragedy _ it's really an act of terrorism and,
in my mind, a cold-blooded assassination,'' Pataki said in Buffalo.


   Susan Ward, a spokeswoman for Buffalo GYN Women's Services, the
private clinic where Slepian performed abortions, said the National
Abortion Federation had faxed a warning to the clinic Friday
morning reminding them about the four-year pattern of attacks. Ms.
Ward said the fax was sent to Slepian at his private office in
Amherst.


   ``He was aware of the threat,'' she said. ``Around this time of
year, there had been shootings.''


   Amherst police said the timing of the shootings was not the only
similarity. In each case, police said a gunman, using a
high-powered rifle, fired through a window into the home of the
doctors. Last November, a doctor in Winnipeg, Manitoba, was shot in
the shoulder by a bullet fired through a window.


   Assistant Police Chief Frank Olesko said local investigators as
well as FBI agents and Canadian authorities were looking at the
possibility that the same gunman could be responsible for all of
the shootings. A task force of several Canadian and U.S. law
enforcement agencies has been investigating the attacks for more
than a year.


   National abortion-rights advocates expressed concern that the
slaying signaled a renewed escalation of violence against abortion
providers.


   The gunman who shot Slepian apparently hid in a strip of woods
behind the house, then fired a single shot from a high-powered
rifle, Olesko said. Local police, FBI agents and Canadian
investigators searched the woods Saturday, but the identity and
whereabouts of the suspect remained unknown.


   Shalom Press, another Amherst abortion provider who had known
Slepian for years, said, ``He believed women had the right to have
an abortion, and he followed his conscience.''


   The slaying comes more than six years after anti-abortion
protesters descended on Buffalo. In April 1992, the city was the
setting for a coordinated series of ``Spring of Life'' protests led
by members of the anti-abortion group Operation Rescue. Nearly 200
protesters were arrested during one demonstration, and
abortion-rights groups held counter protests. Police said Slepian
was one of the doctors singled out by picketers.


   In interviews with The Buffalo News, Slepian said he took the
rhetoric of abortion opponents seriously.


   In April 1993, one month after the shooting death of a
Pensacola, Fla., abortion provider, David Gunn, Slepian spoke about
the vulnerability of doctors who provide abortions.


   ``It probably hits home a little bit because it could have been
me,'' Slepian told The Buffalo News. ``For years I've felt, and I
still feel, it could happen to me or to someone around here.''


   And in 1995, he told The News: ``When you're using words like
`kill' and `murder,' that's where it can lead. If the
rosary-holding churchgoers and the bishop don't think that's true,
they're fooling themselves.''


   In 1988, Slepian had clashed with anti-abortion protesters
outside his home. Protesters had taunted him during the Jewish
holiday of Hanukkah, calling him a ``murderer.'' One protester
later claimed that Slepian had attacked him with a baseball bat,
though the case was later settled.


   Slepian divided his practice between the clinic in Buffalo and
his private office in Amherst. Ms. Ward, the clinic spokeswoman,
said he had worked at that and other clinics for 15 years.


   ``He has been harassed right in front of his house,'' she said.
``His children have been harassed.'' She called him a courageous
man who followed his principles.


   A woman from Attica, N.Y., who identified herself only as Susan,
stood outside his Amherst office Saturday, weeping. She said
Slepian should not be portrayed solely as an ``abortion doctor.''
She said he had delivered her niece and her daughter and that he
kept a photo album of the hundreds of babies that he had delivered.


   ``To me, he was about babies, not abortion,'' Susan said. She
said she had gone to him every three months for the past four years
for treatment of cervical cancer. ``I feel he saved my life. I feel
he is like a member of my family.''


   In Slepian's affluent Amherst neighborhood of large homes, there
was a sense of shock that this protected world could be violated.
The slogan on Amherst police cars reads, ``Safest Town in
America.''


   ``Every once in a while,'' said David Guercio, 49, a neighbor
walking by the Slepian home Saturday, ``we get a pumpkin smashed
around here, but that's about it.''


   Another neighbor, Neel Chary, said Slepian's four sons had told
him of a horrible scene. ``They just went into a panic,'' Chary
said. ``The oldest one called the grandpa and said, `Grandpa,
Grandpa, Dad's been shot.'''



   AMHERST, N.Y. _ Some of those whom knew him said Dr. Barnett
Slepian continued to perform abortions in the face of death threats
because he had what one friend called ``a stubborn kind of
courage.''


   Others said he persisted because he was simply a conscientious
doctor and made his decisions not on ideological grounds but
because he wanted to practice the full range of gynecological
medicine just as he had been trained to do, even if that included
the procedures that many in the aggressive anti-abortion movement
in western New York equated with murder.


   ``Having babies come into the world was his life,'' said Ellen
Fink, a longtime friend. ``But he performed abortions because he
believed it was a women's legal right to choose.''


   Slepian, a 52-year-old gynecologist and obstetrician who lived
in this suburb of Buffalo, was shot fatally in the back Friday
night as he stood in the kitchen of his home chatting with his
wife, Lynne, and his 15-year-old son, Andrew. He had just returned
from synagogue where he had gone to mark the yahrzeit _ or
anniversary _ of his father's death with the Jewish prayer, the
kaddish.


   On Sunday, his friends, patients and relatives were heartsick at
his murder, but also fearful of what they could say because the
sniper who lay in wait in the woods behind Slepian's house and shot
him with a high-powered rifle through an undraped window is at
large. Still, a few took time to talk to reporters because, they
said, they wanted to make sure the man they knew was portrayed not
as a narrow pro-abortion zealot but as a well-rounded doctor,
father and husband.


   Slepian, who as a young man was so determined to become a doctor
that he studied medicine in Spanish in Guadalajara, Mexico, when
U.S. schools would not accept him, was a person who prized his time
with his four sons, Andrew, 15, Brian 13, Michael, 10 and Philip,
7. He capered with them in their backyard swimming pool or taught
them the value of work and money by having them mow the lawn in
summer and shovel the driveway in winter. He was a devoted jogger,
having run a marathon, and was what one friend said was ``a health
nut'' who was meticulous about his family's health and carefully
watched such demons as cholesterol and salt. He belonged to a
Reform synagogue, Temple Beth Am.


   He was painfully aware that he and his family could be the
target of a fierce opponent of abortions and took precautions.
There had been four attacks against doctors on both side of the
U.S.-Canadian border. As recently as Friday morning, Slepian
received a two-page warning from the downtown Buffalo clinic where
he worked urging him to beware of sniper attacks.


   ``Do not assume that you are safe once you are at home,'' the
warning said. ``Close the drapes in your house so you are not
visible from outside.''


   In fact, Slepian often kept the blinds drawn at home and he
called the police whenever he received a death threat. Neighbors
said there were a number of periods when an Amherst patrol car was
stationed outside Slepian's two-story brick colonial in a
well-to-do enclave here.


   But he refused to change his approach to medicine, even when his
friends warned him some anti-abortion protesters would view his
death as a ``coup'' that virtually eliminated access to abortion in
the Buffalo area.


   ``He knew the risks well,'' said Glenn Edward Murray, who was
Slepian's lawyer and longtime friend. ``We had discussed the fatal
dangers he placed himself in by continuing to perform abortions. We
discussed security measures. He was dedicated to providing women
with safe and legal abortions and was unwilling to abandon his
clients because of threats.''


   Murray, who talked in carefully measured tones but still found
himself choked with emotion, said Slepian had as a young intern and
resident in the Buffalo area been taught by mentors how dangerous
and sometimes fatal ``back alley'' abortions performed by bad
practitioners or by the women themselves could be. Even as he had
four children of his own, he was determined that he would perform
abortions for women who needed them, no matter how poor they were.


   So in addition to a private practice he had in this leafy
suburban town in the prairie-flat countryside east of Buffalo,
Slepian chose to work regularly at a clinic in downtown Buffalo
that had been singled out by protesters and was the last of its
kind in Buffalo: Buffalo GYN Women's Services. Now, that clinic has
been left without a doctor.


   ``He had a stubborn kind of courage,'' Murray said. ``He was
resolved not to let the threat eliminate the legal and medical
options for patients.''


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   His wife, Lynne, a trained nurse who stayed home in recent years
to raise their sons, was as resolute as he was in not letting the
protesters stop her husband from practicing medicine as he saw fit.


   Slepian, a slender, wiry man with the bearded face of a scholar,
was born in Cambridge, Mass., into a lower-middle class family of
four children, each of whom went on to considerable accomplishment
as an adult. One of his two brothers, Jacob, is also a doctor,
specializing in ear, nose and throat medicine.


   Slepian, whom friends called Bart, was raised in Rochester,
attended college at the University of Denver in Colorado and
received his medical degree from the Autonomous University of
Guadalajara. A residency at the State University of Buffalo brought
him to this area 20 years ago, and he stayed.


   Although gynecologists will quietly perform abortions for their
longtime paying patients, Slepian became one of only a handful of
doctors in western New York who were willing to perform abortions
at public clinics and not hide the fact that they did. Nonetheless,
his friends said, he counseled women seeking abortion to consider
alternatives like adoption. In 1988, protesters taunted him outside
his home on Hanukkah. When he emerged carrying a baseball bat, a
clash ensued and Slepian was eventually charged with a misdemeanor
for damaging a protester's vehicle. In 1992 he again became a
target in a coordinated protest by 200 picketers from the
anti-abortion group Operation Rescue that was known as ``Spring of
Life.''


   In recent years, patients who visited him at the downtown clinic
or his private office in Amherst periodically endured shouts from
picketers of ``You're murdering your babies.'' A longtime patient
who asked that she be identified only as Karen said that Slepian
frequently apologized for the disruptions the protesters were
causing. Still, Karen said she knew him mainly as a devoted
gynecologist who saw her through infertility treatments and
delivered her daughter.


   ``He wasn't supposed to be there for the delivery but he came
anyway and when I asked him, `What are you doing here,' he said:
``I wouldn't miss it for the world.'' Similarly, she said, he went
out of his way to visit another patient when she was in the
hospital for a non-gynecological ailment. ``I thought I'd come over
to have donuts and coffee with you when I heard you were in the
hospital,'' Karen heard that he told the friend.


   ``He was the type of man,'' Karen said, ``that I would put my
life in his hands and not question what he had to say. And I can't
say that about all doctors.''



   AMHERST, N.Y. _ With no arrests reported in Friday night's
slaying of Dr. Barnett Slepian, the three doctors who publicly
acknowledge performing abortions in the Buffalo area remained in
seclusion Sunday as residents of this quiet Buffalo suburb reeled
from the news that a sniper could still be in their midst.


   Law enforcement officials from federal, state and local agencies
who met with Canadian investigators here Sunday would not comment
on their inquiry into the death of Slepian, the gynecologist and
obstetrician who was killed by a sniper as he sat in his kitchen.


   Abortion rights advocates said clinics in the area that perform
abortions had been promised stepped-up security by law enforcement
officials and would operate normally this week.


   Neither a spokeswoman for the FBI or federal and local police
officials would specify the security measures that would be taken.


   Lucinda Finnelly, the lawyer representing Buffalo GYN
Womenservices, an abortion clinic where Slepian frequently worked,
said that another physician who wished to remain anonymous had
treated patients who had been scheduled to see Slepian on Saturday.
Other abortion advocates said that since the slaying local
physicians had expressed their willingness to carry out abortions.


   ``Womenservices is determined to keep this going,'' Ms. Finnelly
said. ``That's what Bart would have wanted.''


   Many residents here who denounced the shooting refused to give
their names out of fear that Slepian's killer could strike again.
There was an obvious sense of concern over the sniper attack in
this picturesque suburb of 150,000, which was declared the
statistically safest city in America in a 1997 survey by Money
magazine.


   ``The fact that someone could come in and do something like this
is shocking,'' said Nick DiPirro, a retired high school
administrator. ``Things like this don't happen here.''



   The New York Times said in an editorial on Monday, Oct. 26:


   The murder of Dr. Barnett Slepian is the latest depraved assault
on the small number of courageous physicians who still risk their
safety to perform legal abortions in this country. Slepian was one
of only three doctors who performed abortions in the Buffalo, N.Y.,
area, and harassment and threats against him by anti-abortion
groups had become routine over the past decade. He persevered
through courage and a belief in the right of his patients to choose
whether to bear a child.


   But a principled commitment to provide a constitutionally
protected service could not stop the assassin's bullet that tore
through his kitchen window and into his back Friday night. His
death shows again how tentative the right to abortion has become in
the face of terrorism by anti-choice fanatics.


   Their repeated acts of terrorism must be met with the severest
possible crackdown by law-enforcement authorities. If an armed
police officer has to be stationed outside every abortion
provider's home and office, 24 hours a day, let it be done. This is
an assault not only on individual doctors but on the rights and
liberties of all Americans.


   Last week the FBI joined Canadian authorities to investigate a
series of unsolved sniper shootings of doctors in Canada and
western New York dating to 1994. In January, a week after the 25th
anniversary of the Roe vs. Wade Supreme Court decision, a clinic
bombing in Birmingham, Ala., killed a security guard and severely
wounded a nurse.


   Since 1993, three doctors, including Slepian, three clinic
employees and a clinic escort have been murdered. There have been
more than a dozen attempted murders of abortion providers in the
last five years. Arson and bombings at clinics have become so
common that many no longer make the national news.


   It is bad enough that conservatives in Congress and in state
legislatures are working to dismantle reproductive rights by
banning certain procedures, such as so-called partial birth
abortion, and by requiring waiting periods and parental consent
before an abortion can be obtained. But those restrictions are at
least imposed by the normal give and take of political and judicial
struggle in a democracy.


   What is outrageous is the attempt to shut down abortions by
illegal means _ by shooting the doctors or bombing the clinics or
harassing the women seeking to exercise their constitutional right.
Some anti-abortion groups, to their credit, have denounced the
bombings and shootings, but others seem reluctant to issue the
strong condemnations that are warranted.


   Indeed, one particularly virulent anti-abortion Web site lists
the names of doctors it says perform abortions, or ``crimes against
humanity,'' with a code indicating whether they are ``working,''
``wounded'' or a ``fatality.'' Such incendiary rhetoric, and
frequent accusations by some anti-abortionists that abortion
providers are committing murder, can only fuel more terrorism.


   The increase of anti-choice laws and ongoing campaigns of
harassment by protest groups, even short of murder, have worked to
make abortions harder to obtain. More than 80 percent of counties
in this country have no abortion provider. In 45 states, the number
of doctors who performed abortions declined between 1982 and 1992.


   Slepian was among those who took a stand against restricting
reproductive freedom and paid with his life. Unless these brave
doctors are better protected, fewer doctors in the next generation
will be willing to place themselves and their families in such
danger. That is what the terrorists want. They must not be allowed
to succeed.



   Neal Horsley, a 54-year-old computer programmer in Carrollton,
Ga., does not understand what the fuss is about.


   Three years ago, he established a Web site called ``The
Nuremberg Files,'' a list attempting, in his words, ``to record the
name of every person working in the baby slaughter business across
the United States of America.''


   Each name in the list is either in black type, meaning
``working''; in gray, meaning ``wounded;'' or has a line through
it, meaning ``fatality.''


   In an interview Sunday, Horsley said that shortly after hearing
news reports Friday night that a doctor who performed abortions had
been shot and killed in his kitchen in a suburb of Buffalo, N.Y.,
he drew a line through the name of the doctor, Barnett Slepian, on
the Web site.


   Abortion-rights organizations have denounced his action,
implying that Horsley may have crossed out Slepian's name before he
was killed.


   ``I certainly did not have advance information,'' Horsley said.
``I'm the only one who can change anything on the Web site. That's
tantamount to saying I knew of and advocated his death. What is
that? Libel or slander?''


   Asked to define his role and that of his Web site, Horsley
replied: ``I'm a reporter. I am simply a journalist.''


   Law-enforcement officials would not discuss the investigation of
the Slepian killing Sunday, but no one has suggested that the Web
site had any connection with the attack.


   Horsley said the goal of the Web site was to gather information
about doctors who perform abortions so they could be arrested and
punished should abortion be made illegal once again. He said he did
not want abortion doctors to escape prosecution for lack of
evidence, as happened with some Nazi war criminals, and so he
called the site ``The Nuremberg Files: Visualize Abortionists on
Trial'' (http://www.christiangallery.com/atrocity/).


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   Visitors to the Web site are asked to provide a wide variety of
information about people who perform or aid in abortions. The
information includes photos or videotapes of the doctors, their
cars, houses, and friends; criminal records, including driving
record, mug shots, and fingerprint card; and civil suit records,
including ``informative depositions and divorce file (if any).''


   Horsley said he received his information through e-mail and
regular mail from anti-abortion activists and said he did not
regard the compiling of such information as an incitement to
violence. ``I have no power to stop them,'' he said.


   Asked about animation that depicts dripping blood under his
request for viewers to ``e-mail evidence or feedback,'' he replied:
``That is the blood of the unborn.''


   Horsley said he first became aware of Slepian's death ``sometime
after sunup'' on Saturday morning through an E-mail or a report on
a computerized wire service.


   ``I did not have a feeling of guilt when I saw it,'' he said.
``I did not have a feeling of sadness. We're involved in a war.
There are 4,000 babies a day being killed. To do this work, you
have to be like a policeman dealing with the reality of corpses.''


   He said he had not received communication from anyone taking
responsibility for Slepian's death or other attacks on people who
perform or aid in abortions.


   The Web site has recorded 180,000 to 220,000 visits per month in
the last two years, Horsley said. On Friday, there were 7,886
visits and on Saturday, 18,295. Data for Sunday were not available
Sunday night.



   NEW YORK _ In the second and final debate in the race for state
attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, the Democratic challenger, accused
Republican incumbent Dennis Vacco on Sunday of ignoring the threat
posed by radical anti-abortion advocates, thereby helping to ease
the way for this weekend's slaying of an obstetrician.


   The obstetrician, Dr. Barnett Slepian, was killed by a sniper on
Friday night at his home in a Buffalo suburb. Spitzer seized on the
shooting again and again during their half-hour debate, which was
broadcast live on WABC-TV in Manhattan and shown on other network
affiliates across the state.


   Spitzer cited a ruling in 1992 in which a federal judge rebuked
Vacco, who was then the U.S. attorney for western New York, for
failing to pursue contempt charges when protesters violated a court
order against blocking the entrance to a clinic where Slepian was
working. The judge, Richard Arcara of Buffalo, took the rare step
of removing Vacco from the case and replacing him with two special
prosecutors.


   Spitzer, speaking of his opponent, said, ``The horror that
occurred the other night should weigh heavily on his conscience.''
He also chided Vacco for getting rid of the Office of Reproductive
Rights when he became attorney general. ``Mr. Vacco disbanded the
very unit that was to protect this doctor,'' Spitzer said.


   Vacco responded heatedly, assailing his opponent for exploiting
the slaying for political purposes. ``I think it borders on being
despicable that Mr. Spitzer would try to seek political advantage
at the expense of Dr. Slepian and Dr. Slepian's family,'' Vacco
said.


   The incumbent, who is personally opposed to abortion, cited his
successful effort to win a U.S. Supreme Court ruling upholding a
ban on blocking abortion clinics.


   After the debate, Kelli Conlin, executive director of the New
York chapter of the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights
Action League, said that the case was started under Vacco's
predecessor.


   If anything, Sunday's debate was even nastier than the first
one, which was held in Woodbury, N.Y., on Friday. Vacco continued
hammering Spitzer for refusing to explain inconsistencies regarding
his campaign loans.


   Less than halfway through the debate, Vacco offered to yield the
rest of his time to Spitzer if he would reconcile his campaign
spending. At issue is Spitzer's claim that he had used eight
cooperative apartments he owns in Manhattan as collateral for
millions of dollars of campaign loans with a document submitted to
the state by his father, Bernard Spitzer. Before the cameras, Vacco
waved a document in which the father, a real estate developer, had
sworn that the apartments were not being used as collateral.


   He suggested Spitzer was being less than candid about the source
of his campaign financing. ``Show us the money,'' Vacco pleaded.


   As he did in the Friday debate, Spitzer provided only a
bare-bones response. ``The documents have been submitted,'' he
said. ``The response is very simple, Mr. Vacco: You're wrong on the
facts, you're wrong on the law.''


   Pressed by reporters to say more on the issue after the debate,
Spitzer said he would ``answer the facts at the right time'' and
declined to elaborate.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   Since those two issues occupied most of the half-hour allotted
to the debate, the candidates had little time to spell out their
ideological differences. Spitzer once again accused Vacco of
diminishing the stature of the attorney general's office, pointing
to reports that 80 percent of the people hired since Vacco took
over in 1994 had political connections. Vacco sought to deflect
that criticism by enumerating his accomplishments in fighting crime
and other areas.


   After the debate, two political analysts _ one a Republican, the
other an independent _ said Spitzer's handling of the questions
about his finances had harmed his campaign.


   ``If it's so easy to explain, why didn't he remove it from the
menu?'' said Jay Severin, the Republican strategist.


   John Zogby, an independent pollster in Utica, N.Y., said that if
Spitzer made a simple technical error, he has compounded it by his
reticence. ``That could be one of the things that causes Spitzer to
sputter,'' he said. ``I think he's handled it very badly.''


   On the other hand, Severin said, Spitzer did well by responding
so quickly to Slepian's slaying. ``It is evidence of some skill
politically that he was able to seize on it,'' he said.


   Since polls indicate that two of three New York voters favor
abortion rights, Zogby said, it was a smart move for Spitzer to
home in on the shooting as a way to attract Democrats, moderate
Republicans and women to the polls.



   Five sniper attacks against abortion doctors in Canada and the
United States have occurred in the last four years within a few
weeks of Nov. 11, or Veterans Day, a date observed as Remembrance
Day in Canada, but which some anti-abortion activists are said to
call ``Remember the Unborn Children Day.'' In each case, a sniper
fired a high-powered rifle from behind the doctor's home.


   Nov. 8, 1994, Vancouver, B.C. _ Dr. Garson Romalis, 57, is
eating breakfast in his kitchen at 7:10 a.m. when two bullets crash
through a sliding glass patio door. One shatters his thigh bone and
severs his femoral artery. He nearly bleeds to death, but makes a
tourniquet from his bathrobe belt and calls for help. The shooter
had fired at least three times from a wooded ravine behind the
house. The doctor's wife and daughter also are at home but are
unharmed. Police recover two shell casings from high-powered rifle
bullets behind the house.


   Nov. 10, 1995, Ancaster, Ont. _ Dr. Hugh Short, 62, is at home
watching television with his wife in a rear, second-floor den at
about 9:30 p.m. when a bullet comes through a window, shattering
his right elbow. A single shell casing is found in a wooded ravine
behind the home, in a suburb of Hamilton, Ont. After losing the use
of his hand, he stops practicing medicine.


   Oct. 28, 1997, Perinton, N.Y. _ An unidentified doctor is
standing by an indoor pool in the rear of his house in a suburb of
Rochester, N.Y., between 7 and 8 p.m. when a bullet comes through a
sliding glass door. The doctor is not hit by the bullet but
sustains minor cuts from debris when the bullet strikes a wall.


   Nov. 11, 1997, Winnipeg, Manitoba _ Dr. Jack Fainman, 66, is hit
by a bullet fired through a back window of his home along the Red
River at about 9 p.m. The bullet hits him in the right shoulder a
few inches from his heart. Police dogs track footprints in fresh
snow behind his house to a park near the river nearby.


   Oct. 23, 1998, Amherst, N.Y. _ Dr. Barnett A. Slepian, 52, is
shot and killed when a bullet crashes through a kitchen window at
the back of his home, in a suburb of Buffalo, at about 10 p.m. He
had just returned home from synagogue with his wife and greeted his
four sons.



   The killing of Dr. Barnett Slepian, a gynecologist in Buffalo
who performed abortions, has become a factor in at least two
campaigns in New York, say political consultants and some campaign
advisers.


   In the race for attorney general, the Democratic candidate,
Eliot Spitzer, who favors abortion rights, has moved quickly to
make the anti-abortion position of his opponent, Attorney General
Dennis Vacco, a central issue in the campaign.


   And in the tight race for U.S. Senate, while the Democrat,
Charles Schumer, another abortion-rights supporter, has not raised
Slepian's death himself, his aides say it puts a new emphasis on
the issue.


   Slepian was shot in the back on Friday night as he stood in his
kitchen. No suspects have been identified. Even before the killing,
Schumer was tyring to draw more attention to the anti-abortion
record of his opponent, Senator Alfonse D'Amato, a Republican who
is also running on the Right to Life Party line.


   In a New York Times/CBS News poll completed on Saturday, 69
percent of those polled said they did not know D'Amato's position
on abortion, and only 19 percent knew that he opposed abortion
rights.


   Now events are doing the work for Schumer. Slepian's death was
among the first topics raised in Saturday night's debate between
the two men, and it was instantly followed by a question to D'Amato
on whether he opposed first-trimester abortions for adult women.


   On Tuesday, the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action
League plans to hold a news conference to screen a television
advertisement _ made last week, before Slepian died _ featuring
Emily Lyons, a nurse who was badly wounded earlier this year in the
bombing of an abortion clinic in Alabama.


   The advertisement, said Kelli Conlin, the executive director of
the New York State affiliate of Naral, is intended to spotlight
D'Amato's vote against the 1994 Freedom of Access to Clinic
Entrances Act, which Schumer sponsored. The measure made it a
Federal crime to attack or blockade an abortion clinic. Now, Ms.
Conlin said, it will have new resonance, and the organization is
considering buying more air time.


   ``It's incredibly sincere and powerful and it would have been
regardless,'' she said. ``But sensitivities are so heightened from
the shooting in western New York that it's even more powerful.''


   David Eichenbaum, a Democratic political consultant who is not
working for anyone in this year's campaign, said abortion ``is no
longer the driving issue it once was, at least on the pro-choice
side.''


   But, Eichenbaum said: ``Sometimes an incident like this will do
more to energize those who are pro-choice who otherwise might not
consider that as an important an issue to go to the polls over. It
brings it home.''


   D'Amato's aides would not comment about the political
ramifications of the slaying, and Schumer's aides would not talk
about whether they planned to refer to it in any advertisements, or
whether the candidate planned to use it on the campaign trail.


   ``Both Senator D'Amato and Chuck Schumer agree this was a
horrific crime and a horrible tragedy,'' said Josh Isay, Schumer's
campaign manager.


   But, Isay added, ``it heightens the abortion issue.''


   Steven Goldstein, the campaign spokesman for Spitzer, was less
reticent. ``Eliot is going to make a huge priority of this,''
Goldstein said. ``Stopping clinic violence is going to be a major
theme of our campaign from now to Election Day.''


   In Sunday's debate against Vacco, Spitzer attacked him for
failing to enforce a court order in 1992 against anti-abortion
protesters who had blocked the entrance to a clinic. It was the
same clinic where Slepian worked.


   A federal judge removed Vacco, then the U.S. attorney for
western New York, from the case. He was replaced with two special
prosecutors. Spitzer also criticized Vacco for dismantling the
Office of Reproductive Rights, which investigated threats and
crimes against abortion clinics, when he became attorney general.


   On Monday, Spitzer called for Vacco to revive that unit
immediately, vowing that he would do so on his first day in office
if elected.


   Goldstein, who said it was ``thoroughly, thoroughly possible''
that the issue would surface in Spitzer's advertisements, defended
the use of the issue by noting that the attorney general has direct
impact on the issue of clinic access.


   Vacco's campaign manager, Matt Behrmann, said in a statement
that Spitzer had ``sunk to a new and despicable low by attempting
to capitalize on the murder of a physician in order to garner
votes.''


   ``It's possible that New York politics has never seen anything
as crass as Eliot Spitzer's willingness to exploit the unfortunate
murder of Slepian as a steppingstone for his own political
ambitions,'' Berhrmann said.


   Several consultants agreed that there might be political hay to
be made in Slepian's death but that it had to be done carefully.


   ``Trying to score political points from a homicide can have a
backlash,'' said Maureen Connelly, a media consultant not working
for any candidate in next week's election.



   BUFFALO, N.Y. _ With federal marshals posted outside and
protesters waving pictures of aborted fetuses from the sidewalk,
the clinic where Dr. Barnett A. Slepian performed abortions until
he was slain on Friday night reopened here Tuesday and its director
vowed to continue his work.


   Short-staffed even before Slepian was fatally shot by a sniper
who hid in a wooded field behind his home, the clinic, Buffalo
Women's Gynecological Services, scrambled to find doctors to cover
his schedule.


   But the clinic performed no abortions Tuesday and saw only a few
patients, said the director, Marilynn Buckham. Instead, she said,
the staff spent the day mourning. ``We needed to talk about the
loss of our friend,'' she said after a series of staff meetings.
``We discussed how badly we felt.''


   In a brief and tearful interview in her office, Ms. Buckham said
she had received calls from doctors around the country who offered
to perform there and said some would be flying to Buffalo as early
as Wednesday. ``We will be doing abortions,'' she said.


   The sniper attack that killed Slepian left many women here, most
of them poor or working-class, expressing outrage that a bullet had
deprived them at least temporarily of one of the few options they
had to end an unwanted or unhealthy pregnancy.


   The clinic is the only one left in Buffalo, New York State's
second-largest city, that specializes in abortions.


   The anger could be seen in people like Karen Jones, 25, who
dropped off a friend at the clinic Tuesday morning, only to be
swarmed by anti-abortion protesters who screamed, ``Be strong!''
and ``Save the baby!''


   ``It's none of their business if someone wants to have an
abortion,'' she said, nervously taking a drag from a cigarette as
she sat in her car, awaiting her friend. ``Are they going to be
around to help raise the baby? No they won't. This decision is
between a woman and her God.''


   As the staff at the clinic scheduled appointments for the rest
of the week _ one staff member said the clinic was fully booked for
Thursday and Friday _ local and federal investigators reported
little progress in their search for the sniper who shot Slepian,
52, through an undraped window as he stood in his kitchen in the
nearby suburb of Amherst.


   The officials were working on the theory that his killing is
linked to four other sniper attacks since 1994 on doctors who
perform abortions here and in Canada. Three of the attacks took
place in Canada, and one in Rochester, though no one was killed.


   Tuesday, according to a friend, Lynne Slepian, the doctor's
widow, was trying to spend time alone with their four young sons,
talking about what had happened to their father and the
consequences for their family.


   ``Right now, she is worried about the kids' safety and
well-being,'' said the friend, Ellen Fink. ``Yes, she is worried
about how she is going to support them. But that is tomorrow.''


   The federal government dispatched United States. Marshals here
Tuesday to assist clinic workers in their efforts to reopen Tuesday
morning, though there was no visible protection from local law
enforcement authorities.


   Federal officials said that the marshals would be on hand to
protect doctors who plan to arrive here from around the country to
fill in for Slepian. They gave no further details.


   ``We intend to provide a high level of security for the doctors
and patients who come here,'' said one federal law enforcement
official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.


   As for the women who live in this poor end of town, Slepian's
death stirred not only sadness but also practical concerns about
what they will do should they or their daughters become pregnant.


   Sharon Ashley, 43, recalled that teen-age a friends showed up at
the clinic about a year ago, only to be confronted by anti-abortion
protesters who convinced her to keep the baby.


   In the end, she said, the young women was so unprepared to be a
mother that child welfare authorities took the child away.


   ``They told her that they would help her,'' Ms. Ashely said of
the anti-abortion protesters. ``But they didn't do anything. They
left that girl on her own. What you had was a child trying to raise
a child.''


   She added: ``Doctor Slepian helped a lot of people. Women around
her don't have many options now. I think what you are going to see
is young girls trying to give themselves abortions. It's like we're
going back to the old days.''


   Nancy Roseboro, 31, remembers showing up at the clinic as a
young girl to get an abortion after the man she lived with left
her. As far as she is concerned, Slepian gave her a second chance.


   ``If I had had that child, I'd be stuck on welfare or
something,'' she said. ``I was a child. I couldn't take care of my
own self. How could I take care of a child? I think it was the best
decision I could have made.''


   Betty Hodlen sees the issue in terms of class and race. More
affluent women, she says, can go to private doctors who will
perform abortions. But poor women like herself have had to rely on
people like Slepian.


   ``He was a kind man, a good man,'' she said. ``I think a lot of
people in this community feel a sense of loss. This is an outrage.
The anti-abortion people say they want to save lives, but they have
also taken lives now.''

