
	   WARSAW, Poland (AP) _ An Arctic cold wave that hit Poland a week
ago has killed 32 people, police said Monday.
	   Most of the victims were middle-aged men who had been drinking
alcohol and passed out in the cold, according to Grazyna Puchalska
of the national police headquarters. Other victims included
homeless people, according to police.
	   Temperatures in central and eastern Poland over the weekend were
as low as minus 20 degrees Celsius (minus 4 Fahrenheit).
	   The lowest temperature reported was minus 26 Celsius (minus 15
Fahrenheit) early Sunday in Ostroleka in northeast Poland.
	   The cold wave hit on Nov. 16, making it one of the coldest
Novembers in Poland in recent years. Weather forecasters predict
higher temperatures in the next few days.
	   (ajs-tsc)

	   BUCHAREST, Romania (AP) _ An Arctic cold wave and accompanying
blizzards have killed at least 62 people throughout Europe, police
and media reported Monday.
	   The early winter weather played a role in at least 24 deaths in
Romania and Bulgaria over the past three days. In Poland, 32 people
died, most of them homeless or others who passed out in the cold
after drinking alcohol, police said.
	   Temperatures in central and eastern Poland over the weekend were
as low as minus 20 degrees Celsius (minus 4 Fahrenheit). The lowest
temperature reported was minus 26 Celsius (minus 15 Fahrenheit)
early Sunday in Ostroleka in northeast Poland.
	   The cold wave hit on Nov. 16, making it one of the coldest
Novembers in Poland in recent years. Weather forecasters predict
higher temperatures in the next few days.
	   In Romania, at least 21 people died from the cold and in
weather-related accidents on snow-covered roads since Friday.
Temperatures plunged to 14 early today.
	   About 200 people spent more than 48 hours stranded in their cars
after winds whipped snowdrifts across main highways in southern
Romania. Army vehicles rescued most drivers but six people froze to
death over the weekend after being trapped in their cars.
	   Dozens of trains were canceled and 200 communities were reported
to be without electricity, the Libertatea newspaper reported
Monday. Some 15 major roads were blocked by snowdrifts as high as
1.5 meters (five feet). Police urged drivers not to travel in snowy
areas.
	   In Bucharest, dozens of cars smashed into other vehicles and
skidded in the icy conditions. The Emergency Hospital in Bucharest
said it treated 80 people for fractures and frostbite over the
weekend.
	   In France, the death toll from the cold snap rose Monday to six
people, three of them homeless men.
	   Fountains in front of the Eiffel Tower in Paris were completely
frozen, and in Mouthe, in eastern France, temperatures fell Monday
morning to minus 21 Celsius (minus 6 F).
	   In Bulgaria, three people died in the northwestern region of
Montana, the daily 24 Chassa reported Monday. Some highways were
blocked and some areas were without power, phones and running
water.
	   The Black Sea ports of Burgas in Bulgaria and Constanta in
Romania were closed Monday due to storms, state radio reported.

	    &UR; Eds: UPDATES with four more deaths in Poland
 &UR; AP Photo
 &UR; By ALISON MUTLER &QC; 
 &UR; Associated Press Writer &QC; 
	   BUCHAREST, Romania (AP) _ An Arctic cold wave and accompanying
blizzards have killed at least 65 people throughout Europe, police
and media reported Monday.
	   The weather played a role in at least 24 deaths in Romania and
Bulgaria over the past three days. In Poland, 36 people died, most
of them homeless or others who passed out in the cold after
drinking alcohol, police said.
	   Earlier police said 32 people throughout Poland had died of cold
exposure thus far, but by evening more deaths were reported.
	   A man was found in Debin, near Czestochowa, some 217 kilometers
(134 miles) south of Warsaw and two men were found dead near Lodz,
133 kilometers (82 miles) southwest of Warsaw. A report on the
fourth death was incomplete, police said.
	   Temperatures in, 3rd graf pvs
	   (ms-gb)

	   WARSAW, Poland (AP) _ Krzysztof Chmiel knows about being
homeless and drinking, so his explanation for the 47 deaths as of
Wednesday in Poland's Arctic cold wave sounds plausible.
	   ``They drink methylated spirit and then drop dead,'' said the
46-year-old Chmiel, bundled up in a long, heavy coat at a Warsaw
homeless shelter. ``Methylated spirit warms you up really quickly,
but you also cool down quickly.''
	   The frigid Arctic air that moved in last week has claimed more
than 90 lives across Europe, including 30 in Romania and some in
France, Bulgaria and Italy. Croatia reported its first cold-related
death Wednesday, a woman who lived alone in an unheated house.
	   Temperatures have dropped well below freezing, with minus 26
Celsius (minus 4 Fahrenheit) recorded in Poland on Sunday. On
Wednesday, Poland's low was minus 12 Celsius (10 Fahrenheit).
Romania recorded minus 10 Celsius (14 Fahrenheit) as blizzards
swept across its southeast on Tuesday.
	    &UR; Poland has, 4th graf
	   (bp-tsc)

	   MOSCOW (AP) _ Unusually cold weather in Moscow killed at least
39 people in November, medical officials said on Monday.
	   Winter has come early to the Russian capital this year, with
temperatures below freezing through most of the month.
	   Since the beginning of October, 45 people have died of
hypothermia, the city ambulance service said, according to the
Interfax news agency.
	   In addition, 143 people were hospitalized with hypothermia and
51 with frostbite, it said. One man was injured by a falling
icicle, but he was not hospitalized.
	   Cold claims dozens of lives in Moscow each winter. The majority
of victims are homeless people or alcoholics who pass out on the
street.
	   (vi/ren)

	   WARSAW, Poland (AP) _ Two more victims of Poland's prolonged
cold front were found Thursday, raising the death toll from more
than two weeks of freezing temperatures to at least 74.
	   Police said a 40-year-old man was found frozen to death in
central Poland on Thursday morning. A second man was found
overnight in Elblag province in northern Poland, near Gdansk.
	   Most victims have been the homeless or men who passed out from
drinking.
	   The cold front arrived on Nov. 16 with temperatures dipping as
low as minus 26 Celsius (minus 4 Fahrenheit). It already has
claimed 20 more lives than the number of cold-related deaths in all
of last winter, police say.

	   WARSAW, Poland (AP) _ Two more victims of Poland's prolonged
cold front were found Thursday, raising the death toll from more
than two weeks of freezing temperatures to at least 74.
	   Police said a 40-year-old man was found frozen to death in
central Poland on Thursday morning. A second man was found
overnight in Elblag province in northern Poland, near Gdansk.
	   Most victims have been the homeless or men who passed out from
drinking.
	   The cold front arrived on Nov. 16 with temperatures dipping as
low as minus 26 Celsius (minus 4 Fahrenheit). It already has
claimed 20 more lives than the number of cold-related deaths in all
of last winter, police say.

	   WARSAW, Poland (AP) _ The death toll from almost three weeks of
sub-zero temperatures has reached 83, after a homeless man froze to
death in a Warsaw park.
	   The man, identified only as Adam S., 47, was discovered Friday
night, police said.
	   Poland's extreme cold began Nov. 16, with temperatures dropping
to minus 26 Celsius (minus 4 Fahrenheit). Police say the number of
cold-related deaths in recent weeks is 29 more than the number for
all of last winter, with most victims homeless or passed out from
alcohol.
 &UR; (ms-aet) 	   

	   WARSAW, Poland (AP) _ The death toll from almost three weeks of
sub-zero temperatures reached 85 on Saturday, after two men froze
to death in their unheated homes in northeastern Poland.
	   Both victims, ages 36 and 49, were from towns near the city of
Bialystok. Both drank alcohol before going to sleep, police said.
	   Poland's extreme cold began Nov. 16, with temperatures dropping
to minus 26 Celsius (minus 4 Fahrenheit). Police say the number of
cold-related deaths in recent weeks is 29 more than the number for
all of last winter.
	   Many of the victims were homeless, and most had been drinking
alcohol, which lowers the body temperature. On Friday, a man
identified as Adam S., 47, was found frozen to death in a Warsaw
park.
 &UR; (ms-aet) 	   


   NATIONAL FORECAST &QL;


   Inclement weather will affect parts of the Northeast on Thursday
as developing low pressure lifts Atlantic moisture across the
region. Wet snow will fall in northern Maine and on the high ground
of northern New Hampshire and Vermont. The snow will accumulate
several inches in some areas. Farther south, mixed precipitation
will turn to rain in central New England as breezes from the
southeast usher warmer air into the area. Periods of heavy rain
will fall in southern New England, punctuated by rumbles of
thunder.


   Morning showers will give way to drying breezes and breaking
clouds during the afternoon in the Middle Atlantic States. Indeed,
temperatures will remain mild in the wake of the storm system, as
Arctic chill remains north of the Canadian border.


   Sunshine and warmth will cover much of the Plains and Southeast.
Expansive high pressure centered over Arkansas will prompt readings
in the 60s and 70s from the western Dakotas to North Carolina.
Meanwhile, clouds and breezes from the northwest will keep the
Great Lakes States more seasonal.


   The relentless parade of Pacific storms will plague the
Northwest as pockets of cold air aloft rotate into the region.
Spates of gusty winds and heavy rain will accompany intense showers
in coastal areas. As the showers move into the Cascades, heavy snow
will fall above 3,000 feet. Lighter showers will fall in the
valleys east of the mountains.


   Elsewhere, the Southwest will remain mostly sunny and warm with
a few clouds in the mountains of Utah and Nevada.


   Focus: European Cold Wave


   On Sunday, snow whitened parts of Capri off the coast of
southern Italy, the Mediterranean islandUs first snowfall in ten
years. Meanwhile, as much as 16 inches of snow capped Mt. Vesuvius
as an unusually cold air mass invaded western Europe on chilly
winds from the east. Closer to the center of the frigid air mass,
temperatures plunged to minus 2 degrees Fahrenheit in Moscow on
Nov. 17, prompting Russian meteorologists to declare the
mid-November outbreak the coldest in 20 years. If steering winds
shift and blow across the North Pole from Russia, the chill would
invade Canada.

