
	   GOTEBORG, Sweden (AP) _ A fire turned a dance hall jammed with
teen-age Halloween revelers into a deathtrap, killing 60 people and
injuring 162 others in Sweden's second-largest city.
	   Police earlier had reported 65 dead, but backed off that figure
Friday evening. ''The earlier information that police gave out was
wrong,'' Hand Carlsson, the lead detective in the case, told a news
conference.
	   The fast-spreading fire that broke out just a few minutes before
midnight Thursday gutted the building and left rescuers facing a
hideous scene that local rescue service leader Lennart Olin likened
to a ``gas chamber.'' The cause of the fire had not been determined
as of Friday evening.
	   Although an estimated 400 people, most aged 13 to 18, were at
the dance on the building's second floor, the facility had approval
for a maximum capacity of 150, said Carlsson.
	   The fire, at the facilities of the Macedonian Association local
immigrant group, was the deadliest in modern Swedish history. In
1978, 20 people died in a fire at a hotel in the town of Boraas.
	   Police said most victims choked to death on smoke and poisonous
gases; 59 bodies were found at the scene and one other died later.
Of the injured, at least 57 were in intensive care, according to
Sven Martinell, spokesman for the local medical authorities.
	   The building did not have sprinklers and was not required to
have them, officials said.
	   The dance was attended mostly by immigrants or children of
immigrants. Police said the dead or injured represented at least 19
nationalities, including Somalis, Ethiopians, Iraqis, Iranians and
Swedes, along with people from current and former Yugoslavia and
unspecified Latin American countries.
	   The Macedonian Association, which rents space in the building,
had in turn rented the facility out to others for the dance,
Carlsson said. That person was not immdiately identified.
	   Binan Atta was walking to the Macedonian Association when he saw
the fire. He said he raced in and pulled to safety several people,
including a friend. ``His clothes had burned off. His skin was red
and bubbly,'' Atta said.
	   ``Lots of kids were just screaming,'' he added at Hammarkullen
Lutheran Church, where several dozen family and friends of victims
gathered. ``I saw about 10 people in windows who just jumped. They
didn't even look down'' beforehand.
	   Fire officials were alerted at 11:43 p.m. (2243 GMT) Thursday
and had a fire truck at the scene four minutes later, rescue
workers said. The blaze was already consuming the building.
	   The building had just two exits, one of which was blocked by
fire, city police technician Stephen Holmberg was quoted as saying
by the Swedish news agency TT.
	   ``It was a panic,'' Goteborg police spokesman Bengt Staaf said,
with youths trampling each other to get out, and other youths
scuffling with police to get in and attempt to help friends.
	   Olin said there were indications that the fire could have been
set. ``The fact that it spread so fast indicates that it was not a
normal fire,'' he said.
	   Goteborg is about 500 kilometers (300 miles) southwest of the
capital, Stockholm.
	   The crowd in the second story of the building contained mostly
13 to 18 year olds celebrating Halloween and a holiday weekend.
	   ``A night full of expectation, happiness over extra leave from
school and high spirits in anticipation of a weekend was brutally
and suddenly changed into a tragedy of incomprehensible
dimensions,'' the Goteborg city council said in a statement.
	   ``Goteborg is today a city in shock.''
	   Prime Minister Goeran Persson visited the fire site at midday
and King Carl XVI Gustav made a statement of condolence.
	   Jamal Fawz, 15, told TT that he was out on the dance floor when
the blaze started with about 400 people inside.
	   ``It looked like it started in the ceiling, and lamps and
loudspeakers fell to the floor,'' he was quoted as saying. ``It was
chaos. Everybody was trying to get out and people trampled on each
other on the way to the exit. ... Others kicked out the windows and
jumped out.''
	   Ambulances were called in from several nearby communities. The
Goteborg rescue services also brought city buses into service to
help transport the injured.
	   Anna-Lisa Saar, a social worker at Oestra Hospital, where many
of the victims were taken, said identifying many of them was
difficult.
	   ``Maybe you have teen-agers yourself and know how they are ...
They maybe don't have their own identification, but have that of a
friend who is a year older. Girls don't carry their identification
on them, but in a bag and maybe that wasn't lying with the body,''
she said, according to TT.
	   Goteborg has about 435,000 people.
	   (jh)

	   GOTEBORG, Sweden (AP) _ A fire turned a dance hall jammed with
teen-age Halloween revelers into a deathtrap, killing 60 people and
injuring 162 others in Sweden's second-largest city.
	   Police earlier had reported 65 dead, but backed off that figure
Friday evening. ''The earlier information that police gave out was
wrong,'' Hans Carlsson, the lead detective in the case, told a news
conference.
	   The fast-spreading, 3rd graf pvs

	   GOTEBORG, Sweden (AP) _ A fire turned a Swedish dance hall
jammed with teen-age Halloween revelers into a deathtrap, killing
60 people and injuring 155.
	   The fast-spreading fire that broke out just a few minutes before
midnight Thursday gutted the building and left rescuers facing a
hideous scene that local rescue service leader Lennart Olin likened
to a ``gas chamber.'' The cause of the fire had not been determined
as of Friday evening.
	   Although an estimated 400 people, most aged 13 to 18, were at
the dance on the upper floor, the facility had approval for a
maximum capacity of 150, Hans Carlsson, the detective leading the
disaster investigation.
	   The fire, at the facilities of the Macedonian Association local
immigrant group, was the deadliest in modern Swedish history. In
1978, 20 people died in a fire at a hotel in the town of Boraas.
	   Police said most victims choked to death on smoke and poisonous
gases; 59 bodies were found at the scene and one other died later.
Of the injured, at least 57 were in intensive care, according to
Sven Martinell, spokesman for the local medical authorities.
	   Police earlier had reported 65 dead, but backed off that figure
Friday evening. ``The earlier information that police gave out was
wrong,'' said Hans Carlsson, the lead detective in the case.
	   The building, graf 5 pvs

	   GOTEBORG, Sweden (AP) _ Hundreds of teen-agers jammed into an
upstairs hall planning to dance the night away, but by the time the
sun rose Friday they were dead, clinging to life in hospitals or
weeping in disbelief at a fire that killed 67 of them.
	   Police said another 173 people were injured, 20 of them
severely, in the explosive fire that engulfed the plain brick
two-story building just before midnight Thursday and turned a
boisterous disco dance into a screaming terror in a matter of
moments.
	   Bent metal bars on some of the hall's windows showed the
panic-fueled strength that the teen-agers, many of them immigrants,
exerted as they sought ways out of the hall, which with some 400
people inside was crowded to more than twice its legal capacity.
	   Below the second-floor windows lay stray shoes, broken glass and
bloody blankets used to wrap those who may or may not have lived.
	   ``I've been crying all day. I haven't been able to sleep. I'm
alive, so why should I sleep when my friends are dead,''
17-year-old Alina Turk said as she stood outside the ruined
building Friday afternoon. She said she had been at the dance and
two male friends of hers died.
	   Zuhir Hersi, the 17-year-old disc jockey at the bash, told of
his ordeal in telegraphic bursts. ``Panic. No help. No police. No
firemen. Only kids helping each other,'' he said from his bed in a
Goteborg hospital.
	   Although Hersi, like many of the youths at the dance, believes
the police and firemen were slow, authorities said the first fire
trucks were on the scene within five minutes of getting the alarm.
But the fire spread so fast that even an instant response would
likely have been too slow.
	   The cause of the fire had not been determined as of Friday
evening. Fire Brigade Engineer Bo Wahlstroem said the flames'
quick, raging spread could indicate arson, or that the fire had
burned undetected for a time before exploding.
	   The fire destroyed the building, whose second floor, where the
dance took place, was rented by the local Macedonian immigrant
association in Sweden's second-largest city. The association had
hired out the hall for the night to eight party arrangers, police
said but declined to identify the arrangers.
	   The crowd was mostly aged 13 to 18, witnesses said, and
consisted mostly of immigrants or children of immigrant parents.
Officials said the dead and injured were of 19 nationalities,
including Somalis, Ethiopians, Iraqis, Iranians and Swedes, as well
as people from the current and former Yugoslavia and unspecified
Latin American countries.
	   Identifying the dead was a wrackingly slow process, forcing
relatives and friends exhausted with dread to wait for hours at
hospitals. Some were able to make the wait in rooms off-limits to
journalists, but many had to wait in corridors, crying and
teen-agers hurry in and out of rooms as they looked for their pals.
Only 14 bodies had been indentified by Friday evening.
	   ``The identification is hard not only because of the burns but
also because they have no driver's licenses or other documents _
they were so young,'' said Kerstin Einarsson of Sahlgrenska
Hospital, the largest in the city of 435,000 some 500 kilometers
(300 miles) west of Stockholm.
	   The blaze, the worst fire disaster in Sweden's modern history,
shocked a country renowned for its smooth calmness. King Carl XVI
Gustaf, on a trip out of the country, sent a statement reassuring
victims' relatives that ``all of us in Sweden feel great
sympathy.''
	   Prime Minister Goeran Persson travelled from Stockholm to the
fire site, first laying flowers outside and walking into the gutted
wreck.
	   ``The floor was full of shoes and boots, the same kind of boots
my own children wear,'' he said.
	   On Friday evening, about 1,500 mostly young people, came to the
Goteborg Cathedral to try to assuage their grief and bewilderment
at a memorial service. The youths were dressed in the same sort of
hip-hop garb that the dance-goers had worn, but listened to
delicate hymns instead of pounding disco.
	   They wept, they embraced, and some looked around nervously,
apparently not knowing how to behave in a church.
	   ``I don't go to church. I'm a Muslim, but I don't go to
prayers,'' said a young man who gave his name only as Sami. ``I'm
accompanying my Christian friends. We lost someone. We're mourning
_ that's all.''
	   (jo-pa-ls-jh)

	   GOTEBORG, Sweden (AP) _ A panicky telephone call in poor Swedish
was the first word that authorities got of a fire racing through a
dance hall crowded with immigrant teen-agers, delaying fire squads'
response to the blaze that killed 60 and injured 162, officials
said Saturday.
	   Per-Olof Ortarsen of Goteborg's emergency services line said the
call was so hard to understand that it took three minutes for
workers to figure out what was going on and where to send fire
trucks.
	   The first fire trucks and rescue squads were on the scene six
minutes after the call was received, Ortarsen said at a news
conference. He and other officials declined to comment on whether a
quicker response could have saved any of the mostly immigrant
victims.
	   The minutes of delay felt endless to those caught in the terror
of the fire and survivors have spoken angrily of what they saw as a
slow and even obstructive response.
	   ''No help. No police. No firemen,'' 17-year-old Zuhir Hersi, one
of the disc jockeys at the bash, said Friday, hours after the blaze
exploded. ''Just kids helping kids.''
	   And once the squads arrived, the kids were blocked from helping,
they say.
	   ''We could have saved more young people if only police hadn't
stopped us,'' Mohanned Hussein was quoted as saying by the
newspaper Expressen.
	   On Saturday, hundreds of people stood quietly outside the gutted
building amid flowers and candles as they attempted to come to
grips with catastrophe.
	   In the parking lot that a day before had been a tumult of
ambulances and screams, mourners had laid a 30-meter-long
(100-foot-long) pile of bouquets, candles and cards of remembrance.
	   The cards' inscriptions were brief _ ``I will see you in
heaven,'' ``We miss you'' _ and the people who stood reading them
also had few words.
	   ``I just wanted to show my sympathy. I think about them. There's
nothing else we can do,'' said Caroline Ericsson, who didn't know
any of the victims.
	   For Lasse Gustavsson, having the right words wasn't as important
as showing his face, severely disfigured in a fire. The former
Goteborg firefighter lost his ears, his eyelids and most of his
nose in a gas explosion.
	   By showing up, he said, he wanted to show the victims' relatives
and friends that spirit can help them pull through despair.
	   ``I can't give them hope. Consolation is enough,'' he said, as
people nearby cast uneasy glances at his scars.
	   Many of those injured in the blaze may have to endure similar
shocked looks the rest of their lives. Authorities say the
explosive fire quickly raised the temperature in the overcrowded
hall to 600 degrees (1,100 F).
	   The cause of the fire that broke out just before midnight
Thursday remains under investigation. Witness accounts have varied
widely, with some reporting smoke coming from the cellar and others
saying the fire appeared to start in the ceiling of the dance hall
on the building's second floor.
	   The fire's quick spread has prompted speculation that it could
have been set, but officials also say the explosive spread could
have been because the fire had been burning undetected for some
time.
	   What's known is that the hall was packed far beyond its
capacity. Licensed to hold a maximum of 150, the hall held at least
250 and perhaps as many as 400 when the fire hit.
	   The crowd was mostly teen-agers and mostly immigrants or
children of immigrant parents. They had come for a dance organized
by eight party-arrangers whom police have not identified; the hall
was rented by the organizers from the local Macedonian immigrant
association.
	   Officials said the dead and injured were of 19 nationalities,
including Somalis, Ethiopians, Iraqis, Iranians and Swedes, as well
as people from the current and former Yugoslavia and unspecified
Latin American countries.
	   Identifying the dead was a wrackingly slow process, forcing
relatives and friends already exhausted with dread to wait for
hours at hospitals. Only 18 of the dead had been identified by
midday Saturday.
	   ``The identification is hard because they have no driver's
licenses or other documents _ they were so young,'' said Kerstin
Einarsson of Sahlgrenska Hospital, the largest in the city of
435,000 residents about 300 miles (500 kilometers) west of
Stockholm.
	   The worst previous Swedish fire disaster in modern history was
in 1978 in Boraas, when 20 people died in a hotel fire.

	   GOTEBORG, Sweden (AP) _ Forensic experts examining heavily
burned bodies were able Saturday to identify more of the 60 young
people who died in a dance hall fire, but the catastrophe's most
tormenting question was still unanswered.
	   How could it happen; what caused the flames that raced through a
hall packed far beyond capacity, blocking one of the exits and
forcing panicked teen-agers to flee down the one remaining
staircase and leap out of second-story windows?
	   ''As long as the technicians haven't established the cause of
the fire, we don't know if it's arson or not,'' Goteborg chief
prosecutor Ulf Noren said Saturday evening.
	   Earlier in the day, Noren had said it was a ''50-50'' chance
that the fire was arson, prompting wide speculation that
authorities had tracked down new clues. But Noren later retracted
the remark, saying he'd meant only that no possibilities were being
excluded.
	   As investigators worked to find the cause, examiners identified
another 22 of the bodies, bringing the total to 40, and officials
said 49 people were released from hospital.
	   Of the 162 people who suffered non-fatal injuries in the
Thursday night fire, 76 remain hospitalized. Most of the victims
were immigrants or of immigrant parentage, from countries including
Iraq, Iran, Somalia, Ethiopia and current and former Yugoslavia.
	   The first call alerting authorities to the fire was made in
heavily accented Swedish and that, combined with noise and the
caller's distress, delayed the fire squads' response by several
minutes.
	   Per-Olof Ortarsen of Goteborg's emergency services line said the
call was so hard to understand that it took three minutes for
workers to figure out what was going on and where to send fire
trucks.
	   The first fire trucks and rescue squads were on the scene six
minutes after the call was received, Ortarsen told a news
conference. He and other officials declined to comment on whether a
quicker response could have saved any of the mostly immigrant
victims.
	   But the minutes of delay felt endless to those caught in the
terror of the fire and survivors have spoken angrily of what they
saw as a slow and even obstructive response.
	   ``No help. No police. No firemen,'' 17-year-old Zuhir Hersi, one
of the disc jockeys at the bash said Friday, hours after the blaze
exploded. ``Just kids helping kids.''
	   And once the squads arrived, the kids were then blocked from
helping, they say.
	   ``We could have saved more young people if only police hadn't
stopped us,'' Mohanned Hussein was quoted as saying by the
newspaper Expressen.
	   On Saturday, hundreds of people stood quietly outside the gutted
building amid flowers and candles as they attempted to come to
grips with catastrophe.
	   In the parking lot that a day before had been a tumult of
ambulances and screams, mourners had laid a 30-meter-long
(100-foot-long) pile of bouquets, candles and cards of remembrance.
	   The cards' inscriptions were brief _ ``I will see you in
heaven,'' ``We miss you'' _ and the people who stood reading them
also had few words.
	   ``I just wanted to show my sympathy. I think about them. There's
nothing else we can do,'' said Caroline Ericsson, who didn't know
any of the fire's victims.
	   ''It's damn difficult,'' said Connie Mesfin, who said she lost a
friend in the blaze.
	   Lasse Gustafsson, a former Goteborg firefighter severely
disfigured in an explosion, also came to the club site to try to
show the victims' relatives and friends that spirit can help them
pull through despair.
	   ``I can't give them hope. Consolation is enough,'' he said, as
people nearby cast uneasy glances at his scars.
	   Many of those injured in the blaze may have to endure similar
shocked looks the rest of their lives. Authorities say the
explosive fire quickly raised the temperature in the hall to 600
degrees (1,100 F).
	   The hall was packed far beyond its capacity. Licensed to hold a
maximum of 150, the hall held at least 250 and perhaps as many as
400 when the fire hit.
	   One of the two exit stairways was blocked by fire and there were
conflicting statements from witnesses as to whether the fire came
up the stairs from a lower level, or whether it spread there after
breaking out in the second-floor rooms.
	   The worst previous fire disaster in modern Sweden was in 1978 in
Boraas, when 20 people died in a hotel fire. Goteborg, Sweden's
second-largest city with about 435,000 people, is 500 kilometers
(300 miles) southwest of Stockholm.
	   (pvs-jo-jh)

	   GOTEBORG, Sweden (AP) _ Officials offered no word Sunday on what
might have caused the dance-hall fire that killed 60 young people,
but reports of grim possibilities abounded in newspapers.
	   And while the officials were telling journalists that they had
no answer to the technical question of why the fire happened,
thousands of Goteborg's residents came to the fire site to lay
flowers, light candles and grapple with the philosophical ''why?''
that plagues anyone gripped by tragedy.
	   ''Why wasn't I there?'' sobbed a young woman as she turned away
from the 200-meter-long (600-foot-long) mound of bouquets and
flickering candles that has grown outside the gutted building.
	   The hunger for any answer at all was apparent at an afternoon
news conference when chief prosecutor Hans Carlsson was describing
the investigation and used the Swedish word for ''scene of the
crime.''
	   Journalists immediately barraged him with questions: Why do you
use that word; does it mean the fire definitely was set?
	   ''It was a slip of the tongue,'' Carlsson said. ''We have not
arrested anyone. We have no suspect.''
	   ''Such a fire site is considered to be a crime scene until the
opposite is proved,'' said Ralf Johansson, head of the Goteborg
police's technical division.
	   That is exactly what investigators have not been able to prove,
and speculation that the fire was set ran high.
	   The newspaper Expressen reported Sunday that police were told
just hours after the devastating blaze that one of the 162 injured
claimed to know who set the fire.
	   The Aftonbladet newspaper reported meanwhile that several teens
had been ejected from the dance shortly before the fire began, a
detail raising the possibility that they might have set the blaze
in revenge.
	   The newspaper also reported that one of the dance arrangers
noticed that the fusebox for the dance's sound system had at least
one fuse replaced by a nail.
	   Witness reports on how the fire started have given different
versions.
	   Timur Sklyavov, 16, told The Associated Press on Sunday that he
had been dancing near one of the loudspeakers and saw it explode.
He saidd his 15-year-old girfriend died in the fire.
	   ''I was dancing (by myself) so I didn't know where she was. I
feel guilty,'' he said, close to tears as he stood near the flowers
and candles at the fire site. ''When I saw the fire, I ran out.''
	   But the disc jockey has said he first saw smoke coming up the
emergency exit stairway, located just behind where the sound system
was set up.
	   It's known that fire blocked dancers from using that staircase,
forcing panicked dancers to seek escape by fleeing for the one
remaining stairway or leaping out of second-story windows. The hall
was crowded to far more than its legal capacity of 150; witnesses
have estimated the crowd as large as 400 people.
	   The fact that the emergency exit was burning ``is a circumstance
that indicates the fire could have been set,'' Johansson was quoted
as telling the newspaper Aftonbladet.
	   Witnesses have said the emergency exit stairway was crowded with
wooden furniture, Expressen reported.
	   Many of the victims were immigrants or children of immigrants.
	   The horror fell especially hard on the Shaker family:
12-year-old Jasmin Shaker and her sister, 17-year-old Meriam, both
died in the fire and another sister, Shirin, 13, is hospitalized
with injuries. Meriam had escaped the blazing hall, but died when
she went back in to try to save Jasmin.
	   Like the Shaker girls, many of the victims were immigrants from
troubled countries, or children of immigrant parents.
	   ``We left Iraq 18 years ago. We didn't want our children to grow
up with war and bombs. And then this happens,'' the girls' uncle,
Hassan Bakir, was quoted as saying in Expressen.
	   (jo-jh)

	   GOTEBORG, Sweden (AP) _ Officials offered no word Sunday on what
might have caused the dance-hall fire that killed 60 young people,
but reports of grim possibilities abounded in newspapers.
	   And while the officials were telling journalists that they had
no answer to the technical question of why the fire happened,
thousands of Goteborg's residents came to the fire site to lay
flowers, light candles and grapple with the philosophical ``why?''
that plagues anyone gripped by tragedy.
	   ``Why wasn't I there?'' sobbed a young woman as she turned away
from the 200-meter-long (600-foot-long) mound of bouquets and
flickering candles that has grown outside the gutted building.
	   The hunger for any answer at all was apparent at an afternoon
news conference when chief prosecutor Hans Carlsson was describing
the investigation into the fire that broke out just before midnight
Thursday and used the Swedish word for ``scene of the crime.''
	   Journalists immediately barraged him with questions: Why do you
use that word; does it mean the fire definitely was set?
	   ``It was a slip of the tongue,'' Carlsson said. ``We have not
arrested anyone. We have no suspect.''
	   ``Such a fire site is considered to be a crime scene until the
opposite is proved,'' said Ralf Johansson, head of the police
technical division in Goteborg.
	   That is exactly what investigators have not been able to prove,
and speculation that the fire was set ran high.
	   The newspaper Expressen reported Sunday that police were told
just hours after the devastating blaze that one of the 162 injured
claimed to know who set the fire.
	   The Aftonbladet newspaper reported meanwhile that several teens
had been ejected from the dance shortly before the fire began, a
detail raising the possibility that they might have set the blaze
in revenge.
	   The newspaper also reported that one of the dance arrangers
noticed that the fusebox for the dance's sound system had at least
one fuse replaced by a nail.
	   Witness reports on how the fire started have given different
versions.
	   Timur Sklyavov, 16, told The Associated Press on Sunday that he
had been dancing near one of the loudspeakers and saw it explode.
He saidd his 15-year-old girfriend died in the fire.
	   ``I was dancing (by myself) so I didn't know where she was. I
feel guilty,'' he said, close to tears as he stood near the flowers
and candles at the fire site. ``When I saw the fire, I ran out.''
	   But the disc jockey has said he first saw smoke coming up the
emergency exit stairway, located just behind where the sound system
was set up.
	   It's known that fire blocked dancers from using that staircase,
forcing panicked dancers to seek escape by fleeing for the one
remaining stairway or leaping out of second-story windows. The hall
was crowded to far more than its legal capacity of 150; witnesses
have estimated the crowd as large as 400 people.
	   The fact that the emergency exit was burning ``is a circumstance
that indicates the fire could have been set,'' Johansson was quoted
as telling the newspaper Aftonbladet.
	   Witnesses have said the emergency exit stairway was crowded with
wooden furniture, Expressen reported.
	   Many of the victims were immigrants or children of immigrants.
	   The horror fell especially hard on the Shaker family:
12-year-old Jasmin Shaker and her sister, 17-year-old Meriam, both
died in the fire and another sister, Shirin, 13, is hospitalized
with injuries. Meriam had escaped the blazing hall, but died when
she went back in to try to save Jasmin.
	   Like the Shaker girls, many of the victims were immigrants from
troubled countries, or children of immigrant parents.
	   ``We left Iraq 18 years ago. We didn't want our children to grow
up with war and bombs. And then this happens,'' the girls' uncle,
Hassan Bakir, was quoted as saying in Expressen.
	   Goteborg, with 435,000 is Sweden's second-largest city, on the
country's west coast some 500 kilometers (300 miles) southwest of
Stockholm.
	   (jo-jh)

	   GOTEBORG, Sweden (AP) _ After clinging to life for three days,
two youths trapped in a dance-hall fire died early Monday, bringing
the death toll in the inferno to 62.
	   With another 17 people still in intensive care, the figure could
still go higher in what is already Sweden's worst fire disaster of
modern times.
	   The dead, as young as 12 and none older than 20, were among an
estimated 400 people who were at a disco dance in a rented
second-floor hall when an explosive fire broke out shortly before
midnight Thursday.
	   The hall had been rented out for the night by the tenant, the
local association of Macedonian immigrants, to teen-agers who
arranged the dance.
	   The hall had a legal capacity of only 150 and officials say it
is possible that the arrangers who allowed the hall to be severely
overcrowded could be charged with contributing to others' deaths.
	   ``It's important that people have a clear understanding that the
authorities' approval of the premises was not a joke,'' chief
prosecutor Ulf Noren, who is leading the fire investigation, was
quoted as saying in the newspaper Dagens Nyheter.
	   However, Noren said, a decision on that question would wait
until the cause of the fire has been determined.
	   The fire's ferociously quick spread has prompted wide
speculation that it was set. But witnesses have given widely
varying accounts _ some saying it appeared to start in the
equipment used by the disc jockey and others saying there was smoke
coming up fom the emergency exit's stairway before the flames raced
through the hall.
	   The emergency exit was blocked by flames, forcing the panicked
dancers to try to flee down the one remaining stairway or leap out
of second-story windows.
	   Most of those at the dance were immigrants or children of
immigrant parents.


   GOTEBORG, Sweden _ They were teen-agers whose parents had
brought them here from homes torn by war or terror _ from Bosnia,
Eritrea, Somalia and others _ and in their new country they formed
new bonds, through school and music and parties.


   About 65 of the young people died and more than 190 were
seriously injured late Thursday night when fire and smoke engulfed
an overcrowded makeshift discotheque that had only one unlocked
door.


   The fire was the deadliest this country has seen in decades, and
it was all the more painful because it highlighted the profound
divide between native Swedes and the rainbow of immigrants who have
found refuge here over the decades.


   Almost all of the victims were teenagers between the ages of 13
and 17, who had packed into a Halloween hip-hop party at a hall
owned by a Macedonian civic organization. Most of the victims died
from smoke inhalation as they trampled each other in a panicked
attempt to escape, but others were scorched by the heat.


   Firefighters and police said they still had not determined the
fire's cause. Though its explosive speed initially led
investigators to suspect arson, later Friday they said evidence
pointed to electrical short-circuits in the lighting or sound
systems.


   ``We were dancing and then suddenly people were screaming and
running and pushing,'' said Sara Afeworki, 15, who came here from
Eritrea six years ago. ``There were two exits, but the one in the
back was covered up. The only way out was a small door at the
front, and there were 400 people.''


   At candlelight memorials outside the discotheque, and at local
hospitals, Kurds found themselves clinging in grief to classmates
from Romania, Uganda and many other places that refugees have fled
in the last 20 years.


   Survivors described watching their friends jump from the windows
on the building's second floor. Others, who managed to get out the
door, recalled a horrifying chaos within the building as they found
themselves choking and clawing their way toward fresh air.


   ``It the most frightening thing I have ever been through,'' said
Arya Shafai, a 15-year-old Iranian, as he recuperated in a bed at
the nearby Salgrenska Hospital. Arya said he would probably not
have escaped, except that three larger teen-agers managed to pull
him out from a mass of collapsed bodies around him. The boy who
came to the party with him, Gilsad, never got out. ``He was just so
small, you know,'' said Arya, his voice trailing off.


   Survivors and police officials said the hall had been rented out
by a group of Kurdish students, who organized a hip-hop party and
charged an entrance fee of about $5. The hall was not supposed to
hold more than 150 people; about 400 were inside when the fire
broke out shortly before midnight.


   Many of the dancers, including Arya, said they saw a lamp
exploding just before the panic began. Others said they had seen a
speaker fall over and appear to be malfunctioning.


   Disk jockeys quickly began urging people to leave the building,
but survivors said the hall was so crowded that the teenagers had
little idea at first about what was happening.


   ``Somebody said something about tear gas,'' said Andrea
Guajardo, a 15-year-old Chilean girl who had come with her Iranian
classmate, Yusra Morabet. ``We got out of the building and thought
things were actually okay. Then we looked up and saw people banging
on the windows of the second floor and then trying to jump out.''


   When police and rescue workers showed up a few minutes after
midnight, they found many young people relentlessly holding onto
companions who had collapsed or even died in the parking lot.


   ``Young people were holding onto dead and dying friends,'' said
Sten Schaaf, a police officer who coordinated part of the rescue
operation, which lasted until about 5 a.m. Friday. ``In such
situations, you just can't tear them apart.''


   Swedish Prime Minister Goren Persson toured the charred remains
of the discotheque this afternoon and came out visibly shaken.


   ``It was all burned out, with only a skeleton left,'' he told
Swedish reporters. ``On the floor were shoes and boots _ boots just
like our children have. It was only then that you could really
understand what happened.''


   Birgitta Bahl, speaker of Sweden's Parliament, noted with
particular sadness that the tragedy had befallen people who had
come to Sweden in the hope of escaping violent death.


   ``It is especially moving that many of the families who lost
their children had come here to seek refuge from violence and
suppression,'' Ms. Bahl said. Swedish officials quickly set up
psychological counseling centers around the city Friday, and
churches in almost every neighborhood held bereavement services
this evening.


   Yet chaos and confusion continued to dominate efforts at picking
up the pieces. Officials said Friday night they had only been able
to positively identify a handful of the dead teen-agers so far,
because many of partygoers either had no identification cards or
false ones with false ages.


   As a result, many dazed students and parents wandered around the
hospitals here fearful that missing friends or children had died
but unable to know for sure. Police officials said it may be
several days before they know the names of every victim.

