
	   SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) _ It plowed over and past 17
Caribbean islands, crashing into the lives of more than 30 million
people.
	   As each island fell prey to Hurricane Georges' battering winds,
the casualties mounted.
	   They are mounting still. And as they do, island nations are
coming to grips with lost harvests, wrecked government buildings,
lost tourist income and sudden populations of newly homeless.
	   Many past hurricanes damaged only a few islands. Repairs were
often quick.
	   Georges was different. It swept past island after island in the
northern Caribbean, causing billions of dollars in destruction and
killing at least 400 people.
	   In some nations, like tiny St. Kitts, Georges ruined the crucial
winter tourism season and sugar crop on which the islanders stake
their lives.
	   In the Dominican Republic, the immediate concern is survival.
More than a week after Georges' 110 mph (177 kph) winds hit,
searchers were still looking for survivors in towns swamped by
flooding, or combing through deep muck in the grim task of finding
the dead.
	   The numbers of homeless are staggering: More than 100,000 in the
Dominican Republic, 18,000 and counting in Haiti, at least 17,000
in the U.S. territory of Puerto Rico, and 3,000 in St. Kitts _ a
tenth of that island's population.
	   Along with shelter, the refugees need food, water, ice, clothing
_ needs that have overwhelmed the region's small economies and
taxed the disaster response capabilities of the United States,
France and other donor nations.
	   Damage to popular hotels like Puerto Rico's bluff-top El
Conquistador Resort, and splintered windows in oceanfront
condominiums, underscore a physical and economic vulnerability that
the Caribbean's people know but would rather forget.
	   There was a surprise bright spot: The U.S. Virgin Islands _
battered by Hurricane Hugo in 1989 and 1995's Marilyn, which
destroyed 80 percent of the homes on St. Thomas _ emerged
relatively unscathed despite being in Georges' path.
	   ``It's a miracle,'' crowed Elizabeth Armstrong, general manager
of the Buccaneer Hotel on St. Croix.
	   Still, Armstrong worries tourists will be scared away from the
Virgin Islands by Georges' rampage elsewhere. ``It was such a big
storm that I'm afraid people will believe the whole Caribbean was
damaged,'' Armstrong said.
	   Much of it was. Airline service and shipping were disrupted.
Entire islands plunged into darkness _ including Puerto Rico and
its 4 million people _ and thousands of businesses closed.
	   The storm's economic cost has yet to be calculated. In Puerto
Rico alone, property damage has surpassed dlrs 2 billion.
	   Without power, food spoiled in refrigerators, and fights broke
out in hours-long ice lines. Beneath a canopy of suddenly bright
stars over San Juan, candles flickered in windows and drivers
negotiated streets made unfamiliar by fallen trees and the
enveloping dark.
	   Given the Caribbean's dependence on tourism _ it earns dlrs 14
billion a year and employs half a million people _ promoters are
emphasizing the rapid rebuilding in such places as Puerto Rico and
Antigua. And they note that in the Windward Islands in the
southeastern Caribbean and in Jamaica, it is business as usual.
	   In San Juan, giant white cruise ships, their lights blazing
across San Juan Bay, have resumed their weekly visits. Spectacular
pink and purple sunsets have returned, a dramatic backdrop to the
committed navy of surfers and boogie boarders riding the waves off
Condado beach. Old San Juan's blue cobblestone streets are bustling
again with strollers and shoppers.
	   Still, Antigua, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico and
St. Kitts could lose tourism in coming months, said Michael Spinks
of the Barbados-based Caribbean Tourism Organization.
	   Last year, more than 1.7 million non-cruise tourists visited the
Dominican Republic, and Cuba and Puerto Rico welcomed more than 1.1
million each. St. Kitts and Nevis earned more than dlrs 25 million
from tourists.
	    &UR; MORE

	   Things could have been worse. Georges flirted with catastrophic
150 mph (240 kph) winds over the Atlantic, but entered the
Caribbean near Guadeloupe in a somewhat diminished state.
	   Still, by the time Georges left Cuba four days and 1,200 miles
(1,900 kilometers) later, even the usually stoic National Weather
Service was calling Georges ``the hurricane that just won't die.''
	   A high pressure system dubbed the Bermuda High kept Georges on
its destructive east-to-west track, said meteorologist Jim Lushine
at the U.S. National Hurricane Center in Miami.
	   So instead of striking an island or two and then spinning
northward out of the region as hurricanes generally do, Georges hit
again and again.
	   It smashed public housing in Antigua, swamped the beaches of
Guadeloupe and splintered the glass walls of St. Kitts' new airport
terminal.
	   ``Hurricane mash up my life,'' Verna McHenry said through tears
while she picked through the soiled, sodden remains of her home on
Antigua.
	   In Puerto Rico, where three people were killed, the squatter
community of Diamond Point kept its dazzling hilltop view of the
sea but little else. Georges smashed its dozens of squatter homes.
In its wake, strangers and neighbors banded together to clear
debris, stand in tedious lines for ice, water, propane and
batteries and carry food to the needy.
	   Crossing the Mona Passage, Georges bore down on Hispaniola, an
impoverished island of 15 million shared by Haiti and the Dominican
Republic. Its substandard housing proved no match for 110 mph (177
kph) winds, and emergency officials seemed unprepared for the
disaster.
	   Fed by up to 20 inches (50 centimeters) of rain, rivers swelled
into mile-wide (1 1/2-kilometer-wide) torrents that swamped
villages, entombed dozens of people under tons of mud in a
Dominican shelter and left thousands stranded for days. Helicopters
had to drop food rations to survivors.
	   In Santo Domingo, the Dominican capital, officials opened some
shelters only after Georges was pelting the city with sheets of
rain and dangerous flying debris.
	   ``They were overconfident,'' said Hugh Parmer, head of disaster
relief for the U.S. Agency for International Development. ``When
the thing hit, they were totally unprepared to respond.''
	   The United States shipped more than dlrs 500,000 of supplies,
including plastic sheeting to roof thousands of homes. U.S.
helicopters are helping deliver supplies to victims.
	   Authorities also seemed unprepared in Haiti, where heavy rain
flooded the Artibonite Valley, the country's breadbasket.
	   ``We're trying to save what we can,'' said farmer Jean Roberto
Jean-Baptiste, working in a flooded rice paddy.
	   Georges left Haiti, the Western Hemisphere's poorest nation,
utterly dependent on foreign aid to help storm victims. The
Dominican Republic, considered one of the region's up-and-coming
economic and political players, suffered a blow to its development.
	   Fidel Castro seemed relieved in Cuba, where only five people
were killed after evacuations to safe zones. ``The first victory
was to reduce the losses,'' Castro proclaimed.
	   The same can't be said for the Dominican Republic.
	   Asked how many people died in his country, the Dominican health
undersecretary, Victor Terrero, replied: ``I'll confess something
to you. I have no idea.'' 	   

	   SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) _ At a shelter in Puerto Rico last
week, Hillary Rodham Clinton spoke of a dlrs 39 million dollar U.S.
grant to rebuild hurricane-ravaged homes.
	   But two weeks after Hurricane Georges pummeled this U.S.
territory, thousands still languish in schools, community centers
and the homes of family and friends _ and her pledge looks like a
drop in the bucket.
	   The cost of getting the homeless into homes will be far greater
than virtually anyone had imagined, probably well beyond dlrs 1
billion. And U.S. taxpayers are sure to foot most of the bill.
	   Officials originally estimated overall property damage to the
island _ including roads, public buildings, parks, beaches _ at
dlrs 2 billion, a figure now believed to be underestimated.
	   So far, the effort to solve the homeless crisis has been
accompanied by confusion. Officials still don't know how many
homeless there are _ or how to give them homes.
	   Aside from killing three people on the island, Georges destroyed
nearly 30,000 houses and damaged at least another 60,000, the local
Housing Department estimates. Those left homeless can receive up to
dlrs 25,000 from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, as well
as dlrs 13,500 to buy new appliances and furniture.
	   Puerto Rico authorities now say the FEMA program, which would
allow residents to rebuild their wood and zinc homes, may be
ill-advised because it will leave new homes as vulnerable to
hurricanes as the old ones.
	   Gov. Pedro Rosello instead wants federal block grants that,
combined with money from Puerto Rico's local budget, would
subsidize more expensive cement homes located out of harm's way.
	   Under his plan, hurricane victims would purchase houses worth
dlrs 65,000 for dlrs 15,000, with mortgage payments of about dlrs
100 per month.
	   ``Even though this has been a disaster for Puerto Rico, we
should look at this as an opportunity to build something better
than what we had before,'' explained Puerto Rico's Housing
Secretary, Ana Carmen Alemany.
	   The plan was presented to Housing Secretary Andrew Cuomo when he
arrived in Puerto Rico last week with Mrs. Clinton.
	   ``We are banking on having Secretary Cuomo going back to
President Clinton and (FEMA director) James Lee Witt and expressing
to them support for this program,'' Alemany said.
	   In the meantime, 15,000 Puerto Rican hurricane victims remain
holed up in shelters. More are staying with friends and relatives,
though no one knows exactly how many.
	   Concrete decisions on solving their longterm plight have taken a
back seat to the immediate need to restore water and electricity
and provide temporary shelter.
	   ``As of now, there is no program yet,'' admitted Bessie
Figueroa, the Puerto Rico Housing Department's liaison to FEMA.
	   San Juan Mayor Sila Calderon said most of Georges' homeless
represent ``the other face of Puerto Rico'': unwed mothers, welfare
recipients, the unemployed, those in homes most vulnerable to
disaster.
	   ``These are people who are still waiting to participate in the
development we've had over the past 50 years,'' she said. 	   

	   PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) _ Searchers recovered more bodies
over the weekend from tons of gravel deposited by storm flooding in
a southeastern Haitian town, pushing the national death toll from
Hurricane Georges past 150, officials said Monday.
	   Seventeen bodies were recovered in Fonds Verrettes, a mountain
town 50 miles (80 kilometers) east of Port-au-Prince, bringing the
town's death toll to 102, said Rep. Francois Sanozier, who
represents the area.
	   Earlier, officials said at least 85 people were killed in Fonds
Verrettes, population 27,000. The nationwide death toll of at least
150 people was released before the 17 new victims of the Sept. 23
floods were recovered.
	   In all, Georges killed at least 430 people throughout the
Caribbean.
	   Forty years ago, Fonds Verrettes flourished at the foot of
wooded mountains, but farm incomes fell and impoverished peasants
cut down trees to make charcoal. With no forest cover to absorb
Georges' torrential rains, storm runoff crashed through the town,
destroying dozens of homes and buildings.
	   ``We asked the government to build drainage canals. But nothing
was done. Now it is too late,'' said Fonds Verrettes Mayor Nelson
Frankel.
	   An Interior Ministry spokesman, Phares Pierre, told Radio
Haiti-Inter on Monday that the central government had decided to
relocate the town out of harm's way, but gave no further details.
	   A government delegation brought rice, sugar, beans and water for
hurricane victims on Saturday, and more aid was expected this week.

	   PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) _ Haiti has only dlrs 23 million to
rebuild roads, bridges and irrigation canals destroyed by Hurricane
Georges, less than half of what is needed for just the hardest-hit
areas, the government says.
	   Even before the storm caused floods and mudslides that killed
221 people, Haiti, the poorest country in the Western hemisphere,
was a disaster zone. The U.N. Human Development Index ranked the
Caribbean nation No. 159 out of 174 countries in terms of income,
life expectancy and education level.
	   About 700 million gourdes (dlrs 43.8 million) is needed to
rebuild after the Sept. 23 hurricane, Finance and Economics
Minister Fred Joseph said at a news conference Friday. He said that
would cover only the worst-hit areas.
	   The United States has pledged 210 million gourdes (dlrs 13.1
million) and the Washington-based Inter-American Development Bank
132 million gourdes (dlrs 8.3 million) in emergency aid for
infrastructure. Haiti's cash-strapped government _ embroiled in a
political power struggle for 1 1/2 years that has stalled millions
of dollars in foreign aid _ can contribute only 25 million gourdes
(dlrs 1.6 million), Joseph said.
	   The U.N. Development Program donated dlrs 100,000 and Taiwan
dlrs 300,000. Canada, Germany, Japan, and Spain donated additional
hundreds of thousands of dollars. France, Haiti's former colonizer,
sent specialists to help purify water and treat the injured.
	   In addition, dozens of tons of material have been flown in from
private international sources to help hurricane victims.
	   In his estimate, Joseph did not even mention the cost of
rebuilding thousands of homes ripped apart by the storm and more
than 56,000 head of livestock killed.
	   Most Haitian deaths were blamed on flooding and mudslides in
rural, mountainous areas. A flash flood nearly destroyed the
southeastern border town of Fonds Verrettes, where 102 people died.
For generations, Haitian peasants have cut down trees to make
charcoal, denuding mountains left incapable of absorbing rainfall.
	   In economic terms, the hardest hit was the central Artibonite
Valley, which is Haiti's bread basket. Filled to overflowing by
torrential rainfall, the Lake Peligre hydroelectric dam there
threatened to burst. The floodgates were opened, and a terrestrial
tidal wave covered hundreds of thousands of acres (hectares) of
farmland.
	   Economists predict a sharp rise in the cost of living since rice
and beans, Haiti's staples, will have to be imported in greater
quantities.
	   Earlier this month, Joseph estimated agricultural damage alone
at more than dlrs 300 million.


   &QL;


   NATIONAL FORECAST &QL;


   Frost will cover patches of the landscape from the western Great
Lakes to the northern Ohio Valley on Friday morning. High pressure
stretching from Manitoba to West Virginia will promote mainly
sunny, but very cool conditions in the Northeast quarter of the
nation, with afternoon temperatures mostly in the 50s and 60s. A
pool of very cold air at 15,000 feet over western New England will
cause clouds and a few showers to develop in the hilly terrain.
Brisk breezes from the northwest will gust over 25 miles an hour in
the Northeast.


   Drier and cooler air will circulate into the Southeast behind a
stalled front in the Gulf states. A few thundershowers will attend
the front in northern Florida and southern Georgia. High pressure
in the central Gulf of Mexico will direct very warm and humid air
into the southern Plains and lower Mississippi Valley.


   As sultry air pushes northward into the Plains, it will be
further lifted by a strong jet stream disturbance over Nebraska and
the result will be widespread clouds and showers. A cold rain will
dampen the lower Missouri Valley with showers developing farther
north. Several strong thunderstorms may form in west-central Texas.


   A wedge of warm, dry air will cover the Southwest. More chilly,
moist air will sweep into the Northwest behind a strengthening cold
front in the northern Rockies. Showers will fall from the Cascades
to the coast. Gusty winds will accompany showers in the
Bitterroots. The central Rockies should notice increasing clouds as
the front approaches.


   Focus: Triple Tropical Team &QL;


   Rainfall at Mobile, Ala., totaled 24.12 inches in last month,
marking the city's wettest September on record. The previous mark
for September rainfall was 15.5 inches, set in 1913. Moreover,
September's total was 18.21 inches above the average for the month.
Such inflated rainfalls along the Gulf Coast in September can only
occur when tropical systems are involved. During September, the
tropical trio of Hurricane Georges, Hurricane Earl and Tropical
Storm Hermine each dumped substantial rains on Mobile, boosting
last month's total to its highest total in 85 years. &QL;



   The voice that haunts Bill Becker is a woman's, filled with
fear, who dialed in the dark on Sept. 25 as Hurricane Georges
reached its 100 mph peak over the Florida Keys. She was huddled in
a closet, her house shaking, a phone in one ear and a portable
radio tuned to WWUS-FM, said Becker, news director of the station.


   As water ran under his feet and chunks of concrete ripped out of
the studio roof, Becker chatted with the woman and hundreds of
others in the area.


   ``We were the only thing connecting these people,'' Becker said.
``They were describing the water rising. They were asking, `How
high is it going to get?' You could hear the howling of the wind in
their phones.''


   In an industry dominated by group ownership and satellite-fed
formats with disembodied voices, the sound of neighbors holding
hands on the air seems almost old-fashioned.


   ``It was absolutely essential,'' said the Monroe County sheriff,
Richard Roth. ``We wound up using that as our main source for
supplying information.''


   Usually, WWUS, owned by Crain Communications of Chicago, is live
only between 7 a.m. and 11 a.m. with news and a flea market. At 11
a.m. the station plugs in an oldies satellite feed from Westwood
One and CNN newscasts.


   But shortly after Georges arrived around dawn on Sept. 25, with
30,000 people still in the Keys, the station's general manager, Bob
Soos, opened the phones. Six lines jammed immediately.


   At 10 a.m. the satellite dish blew away. By noon an inch of
water had turned the carpets into sponges. Callers reported yachts
floating in back yards.


   ``You couldn't show people you were scared, though I really
was,'' Gene Michaels, the operations manager, said.


   As night fell and the worst of the winds struck Key West, studio
lights flickered. Michaels played Don McLean's
eight-and-a-half-minute-long ``American Pie,'' giving him time to
suck up water with a shop vacuum. He signed off at 1 a.m. as the
hurricane headed for the Gulf Coast.



   For 11 days last month, Hurricane Georges plowed across the
Caribbean, killing at least 500 people and inflicting property
damage estimated at more than $5 billion as it weaved through
nearly a dozen countries before expiring as an early fall rainstorm
over Georgia. It was a disaster _ although not for the entire
region and not necessarily for the tourist industry on which the
area's economy depends.


   In other words, damage, though extensive, was selective. Indeed,
the majority of Caribbean islands were not affected at all by the
storm and its winds, which reached a peak of 135 miles an hour.
Georges may have inflicted widespread destruction throughout the
Greater Antilles, but ``most of our 32 member states were
untouched,'' said Jean Holder, secretary general of the Caribbean
Tourism Organization. ``So over all, our position, as usual, is a
good one, and we want the traveling public to be in no doubt as to
that situation.''


   The entire Windward Islands group of the Eastern Caribbean, for
example, was bypassed by the storm, meaning that visitors thinking
of traveling to Barbados, Dominica, Grenada, the Grenadines,
Martinique, St. Lucia or St. Vincent have no reason to change
plans. Similarly, Trinidad and Tobago, the Dutch islands of Aruba,
Bonaire and Curacao and Margarita Island just off Venezuela were
all outside the hurricane zone. The Bahamas, Cayman Islands,
Jamaica and the Turks and Caicos Islands also were not affected by
Georges.


   Even on the larger islands that suffered a direct hit, such as
Puerto Rico and Hispaniola, many important tourist destinations
were spared. Though parts of the southeastern Dominican Republic
were severely damaged, for instance, and will not return to full
normal operations for weeks, all of the hotels, restaurants and
attractions in popular northern-coast towns such as Puerto Plata
are reported to be functioning normally. So, as always, it is
advisable to check with travel agents, hotel chains and national
tourist offices about conditions at specific locales and
properties.


   Though hotels were the section of the tourism infrastructure
that proved most vulnerable to Georges' depredations, as is clear
in the country-by-country assessment below, the storm also forced
the closing of several major airports, including the regional hub
in San Juan. But at American Airlines, the principal carrier in the
region, and its affiliate, American Eagle, Caribbean service is
pretty much back to normal, said Al Becker, a company spokesman,
except for La Romana, in the eastern Dominican Republic. There, he
said, regular daily jet flights from Miami are not scheduled to
resume until December, though prop service from San Juan has been
restored.


   According to airline and tourism officials, a few other airports
remained available on a limited basis into October because, for
instance, damage to landing towers, radar equipment or runway
lights prevents after-dark landings. Mayaguez, in Puerto Rico, and
St. Croix, in the United States Virgin Islands, fell into that
category, but have now returned to normal operations. In St. Kitts,
where an extensive renovation and expansion of Robert L. Bradshaw
International Airport had been completed just weeks before the
storm struck, restrictions are still in force.


   ``That is God's hand,'' Dwyer Astaphan, minister of tourism for
St. Kitts and Nevis, said resignedly early this month. ``We
received damage to the tower and also to our terminal, but
procurement is in process right now, and there is no reason why we
cannot be completely finished with repairs by Dec. 1.''


   Cruise lines, on the other hand, say they were virtually
unaffected. Many vessels were still on summer routes in the
Mediterranean and Alaska when Georges was ripping through, and will
be returning to the Caribbean only this month. ``The only place we
really ran into problems was Key West,'' said Rich Steck, a
spokesman for Royal Caribbean Cruise Lines, ``and since they really
have got their hands full now and are closed to tourism anyway, we
are going to be substituting other destinations, such as Nassau,
until things are under better control there.''


   In addition, one pier at the harbor in San Juan, which is second
only to South Florida as a home port for cruise ships, suffered
damage, according to officials of the Puerto Rican government. But
that has caused no inconvenience because ``we have enough other
docks to receive cruises'' at the main harbor, said Jorge Davila,
executive director of the Puerto Rico Tourism Co. The damage at
Port Zante in St. Kitts, opened in 1997, was somewhat more serious,
officials there said, but not enough to require cancellation of
cruises.


   ``The first cruise ship to come in was on Oct. 8, a Norwegian
Cruise Line Vessel with a capacity of 1,534 passengers,'' Astaphan
said. Those returning vessels are tying up not at Port Zante but at
old piers nearby. ``I am advised they will be replaced within three
to five months,'' he said. ``In the interim, vessels with up to
1,600 passengers can tie up at the old pier, which is where they
tied up previously.''


   On islands that bore the brunt of the storm, beaches, tropical
forests, golf courses and nature reserves were also damaged. So
even though hotels in the affected areas may be functioning again,
the landscape may not appear as lush as it normally does, and some
visitors may therefore wish to postpone trips. On the other hand,
tourism authorities on several islands say they may institute
cut-rate packages this winter to lure back reluctant travelers.


   In addition, damage to fields and crops on several islands means
that some food items may be unavailable at hotels or considerably
more expensive. In the end, then, whether or not to go to the
Caribbean during the coming high season is largely a matter of
individual preference. A survey of the most affected islands
follows, adhering to the same northwesterly course as the
hurricane:


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   nn


   ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA _ Most of the destruction in this nation
involved residences: Officials estimate that more than half of all
homes suffered some damage. But at least half of Antigua's 28 main
hotels were also affected. Most are back in business, but the
Caribbean Hotel Association reports that several do not plan to
reopen until December. Among them are the Pineapple Beach Club, the
Inn at English Harbor, Coco Point Lodge, the Galleon Beach Club and
the Hawksbill Beach Resort.


   ST. KITTS and NEVIS _ Both of the islands that make up the
smallest country in the Caribbean were struck with considerable
force, which damaged residences and government buildings. ``Every
area was impacted, some more than others,'' Astaphan said.
Government officials estimate that 85 percent of homes suffered
some damage, most of it to roofs, and put preliminary estimates of
repairs at nearly $500 million. On Nevis, the smaller of the pair,
many of the elegant plantation homes that attract upscale visitors
have recovered quickly. But the island's main resort, the Four
Seasons, is not expected to reopen until Dec. 15, due in part to
beach erosion. Nearly half the buildings at the Hurricane Cove
Bungalows are said to have been leveled, but the hotel remains
open.


   Both the Fort Thomas Hotel and Jack Tar Village Resort and
Casino on St. Kitts are closed. Officials said the Fort Thomas
probably will not open this season and that the Jack Tar, the
biggest property on the island, is likely to remain closed until
May.


   NETHERLANDS ANTILLES _ On St. Maarten, Princess Juliana Airport
remained open throughout the storm, an indication that the island
was pummeled by less than full-force winds. Almost all of the 19
hotels and condominiums are said to have full power, water and
telephone service, although some residential areas were still
without electricity early in October, and the Millennium Beach
Resort and Maho Beach Hotel and Casino are expected to be closed at
least until December.


   Nearby, tiny St. Eustatius was hard hit by the storm. As a
result, one-sixth of the island's homes lost roofs, residents were
still being advised to boil water as of mid-October, and extensive
damage to natural foliage was reported. Hotels and restaurants,
however, are fully operational.


   UNITED STATES VIRGIN ISLANDS _ Early reports of widespread
damage on all three main islands have proved exaggerated. Such
well-known destinations as Caneel Bay on St. John, the Buccaneer on
St. Croix and the Ritz-Carlton on St. Thomas briefly stopped taking
guests and reservations, but returned to normal after a quick
cleanup. Airline service is normal and all attractions are open.


   PUERTO RICO _ By official tally, more than $2 billion in damages
was inflicted to property across the island. In the San Juan area,
several hotels suffered significant damage and, according to the
Caribbean Hotel Association, remain closed for repairs, among them
the Condado Plaza, Crowne Plaza, Ramada Hotel Condado and Radisson
Normandie. Farther away, the hotels most seriously affected
appeared to be the Hyatt Dorado Beach, which tourism officials
expect will reopen Nov. 9, and the Hyatt Regency Cerromar, whose
tentative reopening date is Dec. 15.


   The most significant problem in the wake of the storm was the
lack of electricity. An extraordinarily high level of preparedness
mitigated some of the havoc caused by Georges on other islands, but
could not prevent damage to power lines and generators. Telephone
service was restored almost immediately; water supplies returned
shortly afterward.


   ``By Oct. 25, we expect that complete electrical service will
pretty much be restored in metropolitan San Juan,'' said Davila of
the Puerto Rico Tourism Company. But, he added, it may take a
little bit longer in the central mountains, where some paradores,
or inns, are. The luxury Horned Dorset Primavera Hotel, in Rincon,
suffered no structural damage, but was closed until Oct. 8 because
it had no utilities.


   DOMINICAN REPUBLIC _ The highest human toll, more than 280 dead
and at least 100,000 homeless according to official estimates, was
inflicted here, and the country remains in a state of shock and
mourning. Also, the government has come under fire for its alleged
lack of preparedness, and the population has complained about slow
restoration of public services, electricity in particular.


   The most severe damage to tourist facilities was concentrated in
the east, around La Romana and Punta Cana. The area's best-known
resort, Casa de Campo, is one of several hotels still closed,
though a reopening date of Dec. 20 has been set for ``a limited
inventory'' of the hotel's 300 rooms and 150 villas. The Allegro
Resort Bavaro and the Viva Dominicus expect to be fully operational
by mid-November, but the Casa del Mar is scheduled to remain closed
until Dec. 1, and officials say the Allegro Resort Caribbean
Village Decameron should be able to resume operations by Christmas.


   HAITI _ The tourist infrastructure in the Western Hemisphere's
poorest nation is so ramshackle even under ordinary circumstances
that it has been hard to detect Georges' impact. Hotels in
Port-au-Prince, the capital, were suffering frequent power failures
and breakdowns in telephone service in mid-October, a normal state
of affairs there. Georges appears to have done its most severe
damage in the Artibonite Valley, far off the tourist track. Royal
Caribbean canceled at least one cruise to Labadie, on the north
coast, but that was because of reports of civil unrest, not
hurricane damage, said Steck, of Royal Caribbean.


   CUBA _ It is off-limits to American tourists, but still draws
more than one million visitors a year from other countries.
According to reports from Havana, hotels there were affected only
marginally. Some hotels in northern coastal resorts such as Cayo
Coco, however, reported to have suffered some damage, but have now
reopened.


   &QL;



   SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico _ In many ways, the capital of Puerto Rico
does not look strikingly different from cities in the 50 states
like Miami, Houston and parts of New York. There are plenty of
modern new office buildings, condominiums and fast-food places.
And, just as in those other cities, Puerto Rico has lots of modest
neighborhoods, away from the modern facades, with people who are
just getting by.


   But Hurricane Georges, which hit the island last month and
caused several billion dollars in damages, has brought out one big
difference: while nearly every home in the 50 states is insured,
insurance executives and government officials estimate that only 30
percent or 40 percent of those here are covered.


   The result is that much of the cost of Hurricane Georges in
Puerto Rico will not be shouldered by insurance companies. Instead,
it will be borne mostly by the people of the island and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in Washington, using tax dollars
collected everywhere but here, because under Puerto Rico's special
commonwealth status, its people do not pay Federal taxes.


   ``There's a different kind of insurance here,'' said Lemuel
Toledo, a broker and consultant who has been in the insurance
business for nearly 30 years. ``It's called Federal aid.''


   While mainland insurers are expected to spend six times what the
federal government does for damage from Hurricane Georges in the
Gulf Coast states, the government will spend just as much in Puerto
Rico as the insurers do: about $1.7 billion each.


   ``Unfortunately, every time a storm hits an area that is
uninsured, or underinsured, taxpayers have to come in and foot much
of the bill,'' said Steven Goldstein, a spokesman for the Insurance
Information Institute, an industry group in New York.


   And something else is increasing federal costs from hurricanes
both here and along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts. Insurers, reeling
from heavy losses from previous hurricanes, have raised their
deductibles to 2 percent of the amount of coverage, up from the old
standards of $250 or $500. For a $100,000 policy the deductible is
now $2,000. One condo complex on the beach here with $25 million in
coverage has a deductible of $500,000.


   The Federal Emergency Management Agency says that people with
big deductibles who need emergency repairs to live in their homes
can get government help, and that many homeowners and condo
associations may be eligible for federally subsidized loans.


   The reason many people in Puerto Rico do not have insurance on
their homes, officials and insurers here say, is mostly a matter of
money. While there are plenty of expensive houses and limousines on
the island, most people have little money. Annual income averages
$8,500, less than half the average in Mississippi, the poorest
state. But in Mississippi, the majority of homeowners has mortgages
and is required by banks to buy insurance. Here, people often build
modest homes without mortgages _ sometimes worth less than $20,000,
and they frequently go without insurance. Moreover, when people
here buy insurance they most often buy bare-bones policies that do
not cover furniture or theft.


   But other reasons also account for the difference. Not only do
most poorer Puerto Ricans count on federal aid to bail them out of
disasters, they are also victims, consumer advocates say, of
insurers here who essentially ignore lower-income homeowners to
concentrate on wealthier clients whose homes are sturdier and who
buy policies with higher premiums.


   That practice, they say, is a form of discrimination often
referred to as redlining, a term that grew out of the practice _
now outlawed _ by insurance companies and banks in places like
Philadelphia, Detroit and New York of drawing red lines on maps
around neighborhoods they decided to exclude.


   Indeed, in the poor neighborhoods on the outskirts of San Juan,
people say insurance salesmen never come calling. Residents say
they do not really understand insurance and they assume they cannot
afford it.


   In the town of Toa Baja, Tanya Davila sat in a kitchen chair in
the shade of her concrete-and-wood three-bedroom house, waiting for
a representative of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Hurricane Georges ripped off most of her house's tin roofing and
most of her belongings were ruined. The house, Ms. Davila said, is
worth about $50,000.


   ``It never occurred to me to buy insurance,'' she said. ``Nobody
ever came to talk to us about insurance.''


   Ms. Davila, 42, said she did not know anyone who had homeowner's
insurance.


   ``People don't buy disaster insurance because they know the
government is going to take care of them,'' she said. ```If I can
get something for free, why pay for it?' That's not my opinion. But
that's the way a lot of people think.''


   In a section of neatly kept homes in the nearby town of Catano,
Petra Gonzalez, 78, said she was hoping that FEMA would repair the
roof on her $25,000 wood-and-tin house.


   ``I didn't build this house thinking the government would take
care of me if something happened,'' she said. ``I never imagined
anything like this could happen. That's the truth. I'm a poor
person. I'm an elderly person. My husband is gone. If the
government doesn't help me, there's nothing I can do.''


   Some insurers and brokers acknowledged that it was difficult, if
not impossible, to get insurance on the many inexpensive wooden
houses in Puerto Rico. Nor do insurers regard poor sections as
prime markets.


   ``You'd rather deal with the upper- middle-class guy with a
$250,000 home and four cars than the guy with a $30,000 home and
one car,'' said Toledo, who now concentrates on commercial
insurance. ``It takes the same amount of time, but there is so much
more premium and so much more commission.''


   This is not redlining, Toledo contended. ``Redlining means
somebody asks for insurance and you don't sell it,'' he said. ``But
if nobody asks, you're not redlining.''


   Juan Antonio Garcia, the insurance commissioner of Puerto Rico,
also sees no discrimination. ``This is a free-competition market,''
Garcia said. ``The companies are at liberty to write whatever risks
they want to write. People either buy it or they don't. I can't
force them.''


   In the United States, J. Robert Hunter, the director of
insurance for the Consumer Federation of America, said insurers had
never publicly acknowledged redlining. Yet several big companies
have paid millions to settle suits accusing them of redlining and
agreed to open offices in places where there had been no insurance
sales force for decades.


   ``What's going on in Puerto Rico has all the characteristics of
red-lining,'' said Hunter, who has made several trips here to work
as an adviser to the Puerto Rican government.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)




   Jose J. Villamil, a Wharton-educated economist who heads a
consulting company, Estudios Tecnicos, which works with the
government and private industry, said he did not believe that
insurers were deliberately discriminating against the poor. But
Villamil said some of the remedies imposed in redlining lawsuits
should be applied in Puerto Rico anyway.


   ``The government has a role to play in terms of putting pressure
on the companies,'' he said. ``The companies should be more
pro-active in educating people about insurance and in providing
access to insurance. Maybe they should develop products more in
line with people's capacity to buy insurance.''


   About a dozen companies, mostly Puerto Rican, sell insurance on
the island. Royal Group, a British insurer with more than 100 years
of experience in the Caribbean, is among the leaders. Only two big
United States companies, Nationwide Insurance Enterprise and
American International Group, sell homeowners' coverage in Puerto
Rico, though Allstate Corp. is preparing to start selling here.


   The difficulty of handicapping the risks on an island that lies
in the path of hurricanes and in an earthquake zone, combined with
the relatively small size of the Puerto Rico market at 3.8 million
people, have kept the other big American players away, said
Goldstein of the industry group.


   ``If insurers felt they could add to their bottom line,'' he
said, ``they'd be in there.''


   The insurance companies began imposing higher deductibles after
Hurricane Andrew walloped southern Florida with $15.5 billion in
insured losses in 1992. To get regulatory approval for the change,
insurers in the United States threatened to cut back on the number
of policies they wrote. In Puerto Rico, the insurers said that
without the 2 percent deductible, the cost of reinsurance would
force them to raise premiums beyond the reach of many.


   Hunter, a former Texas insurance commissioner, said the high
deductibles ``may have been a necessary stopgap'' immediately after
Hurricane Andrew. But the insurance companies could reduce the
deductible now without harm to their profit margins, he said
adding, ``Reinsurance prices have come way down in the last two or
three years.''


   In any case, Hunter said, consumers should be given the choice,
as they are in some states, of accepting either the high deductible
or paying higher premiums.


   Jose de la Cruz Skerrett, a plaintiff's lawyer who has often
opposed insurance companies in court, estimates that with the 2
percent deductible, 80 percent of the losses from Hurricane Georges
in Puerto Rico will turn out to be uninsured.


   For some condo owners, the high deductible means significant
costs. At the 13-story Solemar condominium on the beach in San
Juan, Ivan Tort, president of the board, estimates damages at
$60,000 _ well below the $100,000 deductible on the condo's $5
million policy. So all the repairs are going to have to be paid by
owners of the condo's 30 apartments.


   ``If you live on an island,'' Tort said, ``it comes with the
turf.''


   At the 403-apartment Condado del Mar condominium nearby, Luis
del Valle is not so sanguine. Del Valle estimates damage at $1.5
million. But he says much of the building was unharmed and that the
deductible _ now figured at $500,000 _ should not be based on the
total value of the complex but only on the affected areas.


   ``We don't think this is fair,'' del Valle said. ``Yes, we have
a contract, but we believe there are some ambiguities. We're going
to court. We're talking about a lot of money here.'' &QL;



   MANAGUA, Nicaragua _ A natural disaster as terrible as Hurricane
Mitch, which killed more than 10,000 people in Central America in
the past two weeks and left nearly 1 million more homeless, teaches
a lot about the way a society does or does not work. Some
institutions and individuals rise to the occasion; others topple
like palm trees in the wind. But the nations of the region always
seem to respond in ways that illuminate their history and
character.


   Nicaragua, for instance, is still grappling with many of the
same problems it could not resolve in the 1980s, when the
Sandinista National Liberation Front was trying to fend off
U.S.-backed Contra rebels in a bloody civil war. In that polarized
political climate, the relief effort here last week was hampered by
petty partisan squabbling; the conservative government and the
Sandinistas, who are now in opposition, even disagreed over whether
it would be more appropriate to declare a ``national disaster'' or
a ``state of emergency.''


   As people in Posoltega, where more than 1,500 people died in
mudslides, waited for help alongside other devastated towns, the
two camps jockeyed for control of the distribution of food and
medicine _ and the political benefits to come with that.


   By late in the week, with popular discontent rising, the damage
caused by the partisanship seemed to impress even some politicians.
President Arnoldo Aleman said he would cede the supervision of
relief activities to the Roman Catholic Church, while Gen. Joaquin
Cuadra, the Sandinista who commands the armed forces, belatedly
called for national unity.


   Another recent storm, Hurricane Georges, provided insights that
are at least as striking in September. Faced with the threat of
135-mile-per-hour winds, three Caribbean island societies that have
adopted radically different social and political models, even
though they were all once Spanish colonies, responded in
conspicuously different ways.


   In Puerto Rico, a U.S. possession, the government leaped into
action as soon as the first hurricane watch was issued. Television
stations repeatedly broadcast warnings to stay indoors and put up
hurricane shutters, provided advice on stockpiling food and water
and showed footage of past storms to remind the island's 3.5
million residents of what they might face. As soon as Georges
passed, utility repair crews were out restoring service and federal
Emergency Management Agency teams were preparing reports and
sending money.


   Next door in the Dominican Republic, disorganization was the
watchword. Newspapers there have complained that the civil defense
chief, Elpidio Baez, failed to issue storm warnings because he did
not want to alarm people. He denies that, but television and radio
stations continued to broadcast soap operas and merengue
competitions until just before the storm struck. Some people who
went to hurricane shelters found them closed and were turned away
by soldiers.


   There are even reports that officials opened a dam on the verge
of buckling without advising residents living downstream, some of
whom later drowned. The government denies those accounts, but an
official of the U.S. Agency for International Development said it
was clear that overall, ``when the thing hit, they were totally
unprepared to respond.''


   The hurricane then moved on to Cuba, which, true to form for a
militarized totalitarian state, responded as if the storm were an
enemy to be vanquished. President Fidel Castro instructed residents
of affected zones to evacuate, an order that was enforced by the
military and local security watchdogs and may have saved many
lives. Afterward, the Communist Party newspaper Granma praised
Cubans for their ``revolutionary discipline'' and successful
``combat'' against Georges, whose ``destructive force'' amounted to
``a kind of invasion.''


   Throughout the Caribbean basin, though, there is also a common
thread. Just as it seems that hurricanes striking the United States
inevitably gravitate toward trailer parks, here the poorest are
also the most vulnerable and seem to suffer the most, regardless of
who governs.


   ``We've lived through earthquakes, a pair of civil wars,
volcanic eruptions, tidal waves and now this, all in the last 25
years,'' said Maria Lourdes Rodriguez, a peasant who lives north of
here. ``When is God going to take pity on us?''

