

   WASHINGTON _ With just five days until money for the new fiscal
year runs out, President Clinton and Congressional Democrats on
Monday escalated their criticism of Republican leaders for not
moving faster on the 13 spending bills needed to keep the
government running.


   So far, Congress has completed work on only four of those bills.
Congress and the president have adopted a temporary spending
measure that expires Friday night at midnight. Republicans in both
houses said Monday that they expected to complete action on three
or four other bills but would probably have to roll the remaining
legislation into one big catchall package to meet the Friday
deadline.


   If they do not meet that deadline, they could extend it,
although they would probably do so for only a day or two at a time.
If they neither met the deadline nor extended it, parts of the
government would shut down.


   Rep. Richard A. Gephardt, D-Mo., the House Democratic leader,
was particularly harsh in his criticism of the majority Republicans
Monday, five days into the 1999 fiscal year.


   ``In my view, this is the worst Congress that has ever sat in
the United States Capitol, that has achieved less than any Congress
that we've ever had,'' Gephardt said at the White House after
meeting with the president. ``Republicans have wasted the entire
year and have left the heavy lifting until the last week.''


   Republicans, whom much of the public held responsible for
partial government shutdowns in 1995-96, said Monday that comments
like Gephardt's were proof that congressional Democrats and the
administration were itching for a fight over the spending bills. In
fact, they said, they suspect that the Democrats would even welcome
a shutdown as a distraction from the drive on Capitol Hill to
impeach the president.


   The Senate majority leader, Trent Lott of Mississippi, said on
Sunday that he was suspicious of the administration.


   ``I am very disturbed by the ability to work with this White
House,'' Lott said. ``It's a matter of trust, and I'm not sure that
as majority leader now I can trust their actions.''


   Even when the same party controls the White House and Congress,
the lawmakers usually leave the difficult negotiations over the
spending bills until the end of each session. But the atmosphere
this year is especially charged, with the impeachment process under
way just as Congress is trying to wrap up its must-do business.


   Further complicating matters is that this is an election year,
and members are eager not only to leave Washington to campaign but
also to insert their pet projects into the spending bills, although
they know that the leaders will decide among themselves what the
final package contains.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   The president has indicated that he could veto at least five of
the remaining bills. On Monday, in one of his most direct and
comprehensive formulations on the appropriations process, he
stepped up pressure on the Republicans to drop their notion of a
tax cut and to enact his proposals on education, the environment
and disaster relief _ the broad legislative themes that could give
him some political footing in a showdown with Republicans.


   Clinton addressed several issues that Congress will be haggling
over in the next few days as House and Senate Republicans try to
resolve their own differences. He asked Congress to approve full
financing for the International Monetary Fund, sought money for
100,000 teachers and after-school programs, and said he was alert
to what he called ``unacceptable'' anti-environment provisions.


   ``These are the priorities of the American people,'' the
president said of his proposals, ``and they must be the priorities
of Congress in these last days before the election.''


   Some of the spending bills are being held up because of disputes
among Republicans themselves. For example, conservative House
Republicans object to Clinton's request for $14 billion to shore up
the reserves of the International Monetary Fund, but many other
Republicans, in both houses, want to approve it.


   Gephardt framed the impasse this way: ``Can the Republican
leadership reign in the right wing, the far right wing of the
Republican Party, so we can avoid a shutdown?''


   Republicans attribute the snags to the president's request for
more than $13 billion in emergency spending that they say would
break last year's budget agreement.


   The four bills that Congress has finished would finance energy
and water projects, military construction, defense and the
operations of Congress. In the next couple of days, both houses are
expected to complete action on the agriculture bill, the
transportation bill, the bill financing the veterans and housing
departments and, possibly, the Treasury and Postal Service bill.


   Each house will then roll into one big package, or omnibus bill,
at least five spending measures that include elements the president
has said he will or may veto. He has threatened a veto on the
Commerce bill because of a dispute over how the census would be
conducted; the Labor bill over Republican resistance to his
proposals for education programs and fuel assistance for low-income
people; the Interior bill over several environmental provisions;
the District of Columbia bill over school vouchers and a
prohibition on homosexual couples' adopting children, and the
foreign operations bill over the International Monetary Fund and
overseas family planning.


   Republican aides said the real negotiations, between the House
and the Senate and then with the White House, would not start until
Wednesday or Thursday, or possibly even Friday.


   ``It will be a massive, days-long conference in a tiny room with
no air,'' one top Republican aide said.


   But this aide, and others, predicted that Congress would try to
adjourn in time for members to get home by Monday to campaign in
local Columbus Day parades.



   Congress is playing ``chicken'' with the president and the
American public. The federal government is now running on borrowed
time. The federal fiscal year ends on Sept. 30. There would have
been a massive shutdown of federal agencies on Oct. 1, except that
Congress voted for a ``continuing resolution'' that supplies
emergency funding until Oct. 9.


   Every year, the president submits his budget requests to
Congress in January and February. Congress has until mid-September
to consider, fashion and pass the necessary appropriations bills.


   But this Congress is playing special-interest politics with
appropriations bills. As of Oct. 2, only four of 13 appropriations
bills had been passed. And at least three of the bills yet to be
voted into law have been threatened with a presidential veto
because of the anti-environmental riders attached to them.


   Eventually, Congress must pass all the appropriations bills, but
unless the most egregious of the included riders are removed, the
public can expect another government shutdown like the one in 1995
_ with the closure of national parks, national monuments, public
buildings like the Smithsonian and the Library of Congress and the
federal agencies that monitor the federal lands across this nation.


   Of course, instead of dealing with the issues, Congress can pass
another continuing resolution so that the federal government
doesn't shut down on Oct. 10. More borrowed time. More political
shenanigans.


   There were signs Friday that the GOP leadership in Congress
realizes it might lose in its collision course with the president
and the American people. Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman
Ted Stevens, R-Alaska, indicated that he is willing to strip off
some of the anti-environmental riders he wrote that impact his
state.


   House Majority Leader Dick Armey, R-Texas, echoed Stevens, but
predicted that next year the GOP presence in Congress would be even
stronger and Republicans will get what they want then. Presumably,
the public can expect to see a greater emphasis on raping and
scraping the public lands after this election.


   But will the GOP leadership swerve enough to avoid a collision
in this session? A number of powerful special-interest groups have
forked over huge donations to see their wishes put into law: the
fishing industry, oil and gas industry, timber and mining companies
and agricultural interests. Approximately 50 anti-environmental
riders remain attached to various appropriations bills.


   Then there is the arrogance factor: On July 24, Rep. Bob
Livingston, R-La., wrote a letter to Secretary of the Interior
Bruce Babbitt threatening to defund Babbitt's office, the office of
the Department of the Interior's solicitor, the department's public
relations offices and its congressional relations offices.
Livingston, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, didn't
like what Babbitt had said to the press about his committee's
antics.


   Livingston received more than $100,000 in political campaign
contributions from oil and gas, construction and agricultural
industries in the past two years.


   And on the Senate side of the aisle, the Department of
Transportation appropriations bill contains a provision that would
allow helicopters unrestricted access to national wilderness areas,
national parks and national wildlife refuges in Alaska. Helicopters
are now only allowed in Alaska conservation areas for emergency
purposes.


   On Oct. 1, Babbitt and Secretary of Agriculture Dan Glickman
sent a letter to Sen. Richard Shelby, R-Ala., chairman of the
Subcommittee on Transportation in the Senate Committee on
Appropriations, condemning the helicopter section of the bill and
promising a recommendation for a veto.


   Babbitt and Glickman wrote, in part: ``This provision would
change fundamentally the Alaska experience and undermine wildlife
protections and visitor enjoyment in our `last frontier.' It
clearly hurts Alaska, but also sets a dangerous precedent for
wilderness, park and refuge lands throughout the country.''


   Imagine the ``whopp, whopp, whopp'' of copter blades somewhere
just above your head as you try to enjoy the deep and beautiful
silence of the great wilderness areas. In cold, dense air the sound
of helicopter blades carries a long way.


   The sound of the blades can have a serious impact on wildlife _
disturbing nesting seabird and scattering caribou herds during
winter when they need to conserve their energy.


   And who would use helicopters overflights or dropoffs?
Extractive industries searching for geological formations that
promise oil, gas or coal might be interested in using helicopters;
wealthy hunters or hikers who want to be dropped off at key
locations; and those intrepid sightseers who want to view the
Denali National Park or the Yukon Flats National Wildlife Refuge
from the comfort of a seat in a helicopter, then drop down to put
their feet on the ground for a moment and finally whopp, whopp
away. And, of course, poachers would find helicopter entry and exit
a quick and useful tactic.


   Congress isn't satisfied to merely violate the deep silences of
the wilderness areas and thereby diminish the experience _ the
Omnibus National Parks and Public Lands Act (HR 4570) contains a
provision to sell off the people's park lands.


   Section 411 of the omnibus bill authorizes the secretary of the
Interior to sell, lease, or issue use-permits for parcels of land
or structures within the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal National
Historical Park.


   Section 604 authorizes the sale of wilderness land with the
Cumberland Island National Seashore. The bill also would also allow
vehicles to drive through this designated wilderness area.


   Last week, GOP leaders in the Senate pulled the Interior
appropriations bill off the floor after lengthy debate because they
didn't want Sen.


   Max Baucus, D-Mont., to be successful in adding an amendment
that would remove a number of anti-environmental riders.


   Now there is talk in the Senate of rolling the Interior bill in
with several other appropriations measures to create a gigantic
funding bill that President Clinton could not veto without serious
repercussions.


   And the political games continue.


   &QL; 
NYT-10-05-98 1735EDT &QL;



   Congress is playing ``chicken'' with the president and the
American public. The federal government is now running on borrowed
time. The federal fiscal year ends on Sept. 30. There would have
been a massive shutdown of federal agencies on Oct. 1, except that
Congress voted for a ``continuing resolution'' that supplies
emergency funding until Oct. 9.


   Every year, the president submits his budget requests to
Congress in January and February. Congress has until mid-September
to consider, fashion and pass the necessary appropriations bills.


   But this Congress is playing special-interest politics with
appropriations bills. As of Oct. 2, only four of 13 appropriations
bills had been passed. And at least three of the bills yet to be
voted into law have been threatened with a presidential veto
because of the anti-environmental riders attached to them.


   Eventually, Congress must pass all the appropriations bills, but
unless the most egregious of the included riders are removed, the
public can expect another government shutdown like the one in 1995
_ with the closure of national parks, national monuments, public
buildings like the Smithsonian and the Library of Congress and the
federal agencies that monitor the federal lands across this nation.


   Of course, instead of dealing with the issues, Congress can pass
another continuing resolution so that the federal government
doesn't shut down on Oct. 10. More borrowed time. More political
shenanigans.


   There were signs Friday that the GOP leadership in Congress
realizes it might lose in its collision course with the president
and the American people. Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman
Ted Stevens, R-Alaska, indicated that he is willing to strip off
some of the anti-environmental riders he wrote that impact his
state.


   House Majority Leader Dick Armey, R-Texas, echoed Stevens, but
predicted that next year the GOP presence in Congress would be even
stronger and Republicans will get what they want then. Presumably,
the public can expect to see a greater emphasis on raping and
scraping the public lands after this election.


   But will the GOP leadership swerve enough to avoid a collision
in this session? A number of powerful special-interest groups have
forked over huge donations to see their wishes put into law: the
fishing industry, oil and gas industry, timber and mining companies
and agricultural interests. Approximately 50 anti-environmental
riders remain attached to various appropriations bills.


   Then there is the arrogance factor: On July 24, Rep. Bob
Livingston, R-La., wrote a letter to Secretary of the Interior
Bruce Babbitt threatening to defund Babbitt's office, the office of
the Department of the Interior's solicitor, the department's public
relations offices and its congressional relations offices.
Livingston, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, didn't
like what Babbitt had said to the press about his committee's
antics.


   Livingston received more than $100,000 in political campaign
contributions from oil and gas, construction and agricultural
industries in the past two years.


   And on the Senate side of the aisle, the Department of
Transportation appropriations bill contains a provision that would
allow helicopters unrestricted access to national wilderness areas,
national parks and national wildlife refuges in Alaska. Helicopters
are now only allowed in Alaska conservation areas for emergency
purposes.


   On Oct. 1, Babbitt and Secretary of Agriculture Dan Glickman
sent a letter to Sen. Richard Shelby, R-Ala., chairman of the
Subcommittee on Transportation in the Senate Committee on
Appropriations, condemning the helicopter section of the bill and
promising a recommendation for a veto.


   Babbitt and Glickman wrote, in part: ``This provision would
change fundamentally the Alaska experience and undermine wildlife
protections and visitor enjoyment in our `last frontier.' It
clearly hurts Alaska, but also sets a dangerous precedent for
wilderness, park and refuge lands throughout the country.''


   Imagine the ``whopp, whopp, whopp'' of copter blades somewhere
just above your head as you try to enjoy the deep and beautiful
silence of the great wilderness areas. In cold, dense air the sound
of helicopter blades carries a long way.


   The sound of the blades can have a serious impact on wildlife _
disturbing nesting seabird and scattering caribou herds during
winter when they need to conserve their energy.


   And who would use helicopters overflights or dropoffs?
Extractive industries searching for geological formations that
promise oil, gas or coal might be interested in using helicopters;
wealthy hunters or hikers who want to be dropped off at key
locations; and those intrepid sightseers who want to view the
Denali National Park or the Yukon Flats National Wildlife Refuge
from the comfort of a seat in a helicopter, then drop down to put
their feet on the ground for a moment and finally whopp, whopp
away. And, of course, poachers would find helicopter entry and exit
a quick and useful tactic.


   Congress isn't satisfied to merely violate the deep silences of
the wilderness areas and thereby diminish the experience _ the
Omnibus National Parks and Public Lands Act (HR 4570) contains a
provision to sell off the people's park lands.


   Section 411 of the omnibus bill authorizes the secretary of the
Interior to sell, lease, or issue use-permits for parcels of land
or structures within the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal National
Historical Park.


   Section 604 authorizes the sale of wilderness land with the
Cumberland Island National Seashore. The bill also would also allow
vehicles to drive through this designated wilderness area.


   Last week, GOP leaders in the Senate pulled the Interior
appropriations bill off the floor after lengthy debate because they
didn't want Sen.


   Max Baucus, D-Mont., to be successful in adding an amendment
that would remove a number of anti-environmental riders.


   Now there is talk in the Senate of rolling the Interior bill in
with several other appropriations measures to create a gigantic
funding bill that President Clinton could not veto without serious
repercussions.


   And the political games continue.



   WASHINGTON _ With four days until temporary financing for the
government runs out, House Republican leaders Tuesday demonstrated
a new willingness to resolve several of the spending issues that
had pointed toward a government shutdown.


   Republicans want to keep the spotlight on the impeachment
investigation of President Clinton and are therefore eager to brush
away any matters that might interfere. They indicated Tuesday that
they intended to drop their hard-line positions on matters ranging
from less money for the International Monetary Fund to a weakened
Federal Election Commission to a denial of political amnesty for
40,000 Haitians.


   Many of these signals distressed House conservatives, who said
their leaders were sacrificing their principles to milk all
political advantage from the spectacle of impeaching the president.
But they ceded to their leaders' belief that if they could keep the
focus on impeachment, Republicans would win substantial majorities
in the November elections and then be able to push through their
conservative agenda next year with greater ease.


   House Majority Leader Dick Armey led the way Tuesday saying he
was dropping his insistence on school vouchers in the District of
Columbia.


   ``I walked away, for now, from my school-choice bill,'' he told
reporters. ``One of the reasons we are so comfortable with this is
that we know we will be back next year with an even larger majority
in both the House and Senate, and those things that perhaps we
don't get done this year, we can get done next year.''


   Rep. Robert Livingston, R-La., said his provision to weaken the
Federal Election Commission ``could be dropped.''


   At the same time, Rep. Lamar Smith, R-Texas, said he ``could
support a compromise'' on amnesty for the Haitians, which he had
adamantly opposed.


   The conciliatory moves came as Republican leaders prepared to
meet Wednesday with Clinton's chief of staff, Erskine Bowles, in
the first high-level negotiating session on the spending bills,
which must be passed by midnight Friday to keep the government
running and performing functions like issuing Social Security
checks and keeping the national parks open.


   ``There is movement,'' said Livingston, the chairman of the
appropriations committee. ``Tomorrow is a critical day.''


   With Senate passage Tuesday of the agriculture bill, Congress
has completed work on 5 of the 13 spending measures, with perhaps
two or three more in sight before Friday, when the stopgap bill
expires. Another stopgap measure would be necessary if lawmakers
went beyond the midnight deadline.


   Armey said he expected Congress to negotiate into the wee hours
Friday and into Saturday but to pass the spending bills in time for
Congress to depart Sunday.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   Members are eager to get home by Monday to campaign in local
Columbus Day celebrations and to avoid the blame they took at the
polls for partial government shutdowns in 1995 and 1996.


   Senate Republicans sounded somewhat less promising about
wrapping up on time. Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott told
reporters he was worried that the president wanted to veto some
bills to distract from his woes.


   ``We're concerned that they are thinking about a domestic `Wag
the Dog,' take advantage of, you know, some way to change the
subject or distract attention from the administration's problems by
not coming to an agreement on this omnibus bill,'' he said. He said
he had not talked to the president since Aug. 20 but that
Wednesday's meeting was important ``to see what they really care
about, if anything.''


   Lott's skepticism reflects the fact that even as some issues
appear to be falling away, others remain to be resolved between the
House and Senate and then with the White House.


   One is the census, a seemingly arcane matter but one that both
parties seem ready to go to the mat over. Republicans want the
census to be based on an exact count of every citizen; Democrats
say that would miss millions of people in the inner cities and
rural areas and that the count should be based instead on
statistical sampling. The difference is crucial to both parties
because the census influences federal aid and helps determine the
drawing of congressional boundaries, which in turn influences the
makeup of Congress.


   Some of the most bitter disputes have been between conservative
Republicans and their moderate counterparts. Conservatives, who
were balking over more than a dozen issues, essentially hoisted the
white flag Tuesday, offering a compromise to agree to keep the
government running but also asking that negotiations continue on
the matters most important to them.


   Rep. David McIntosh, R-Ind., a leader of the 40-member
Conservative Action Team in the House, said conservatives were
worried that Republican leaders appeared intimidated by the
president's veto threats.


   ``We are saying to the leadership that if they give up
everything to the president and the liberals, we're not sure
they're the right people to be leading us,'' McIntosh said.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   nn


   The conservatives are most concerned about breaking the spending
caps set in last year's balanced-budget agreement. They say that
Clinton's request for more than $13 billion in emergency spending,
for matters like the peacekeeping mission in Bosnia and fixing the
year 2000 computer bug, are not true unforeseen emergencies and
should have been included in the president's budget request. They
want both Congress and the president to make cuts elsewhere in the
budget to make up for these nonemergencies.


   Conservatives are also convinced that spending $18 billion on
the International Monetary Fund is a waste of money, but Democrats
are adamant that the money be provided.


   ``We aren't going to leave here without it,'' said Rep. David
Obey of Wisconsin, the top Democrat on the appropriations
committee.


   House and Senate leaders said they expected five spending bills
to be especially difficult to negotiate and that they would
probably be wrapped into one big omnibus package at the end of the
week and sent to the White House.


   The bills most likely to end up in that package, all of which
have drawn veto threats from the administration, have not yet been
agreed upon by House and Senate negotiators. Those bills would
finance the following departments and areas:


   _ Commerce, State and Justice Departments. This bill includes
the census, perhaps the most contentious issue between the parties.


   _ Foreign Operations. This bill contains financing for the
International Monetary Fund and would restrict United States aid
for overseas family planning groups advocating abortion.


   _ Treasury Department and U.S. Postal Service. The four
contentious provisions attached to this bill would block amnesty
for the 40,000 Haitians, require federal health plans to pay for
contraceptives for women who are federal employees, impose federal
standards for day care on state and local governments, and weaken
the Federal Election Commission by limiting the term of the general
counsel and staff director to four years, unless four of six
commissioners approved a re-appointment. Democrats said that
measure was aimed at removing the current general counsel.


   Republicans, deeply divided over these issues, prevented the
House from debating this bill last week, and a conference Tuesday
failed to resolve anything, although various Republicans said later
that they could compromise on some provisions. Rep. Jim Kolbe,
R-Ariz., said the bill would have the best chance of passing if it
were stripped of everything except the measure for contraceptives.


   _ Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education departments.
This bill contains millions of dollars sought by the administration
for education programs, including 100,000 teachers and expanded
after-school and summer-school programs. It would also pay for fuel
assistance for low-income families and job-training programs.


   _ Interior Department. Republicans have attached provisions that
the president deems to be anti-environment.



   The New York Times said in an editorial for Wednesday, Oct. 7:


   In an atmosphere already bitter over impeachment proceedings,
President Clinton and Republican congressional leaders are heading
toward another nasty confrontation on the budget that threatens to
shut down the government.


   In this dispute, however, the White House has a strong hand.
Despite his political problems, Clinton is right to insist on
legislation free of objectionable attachments to keep government
operations going past Friday. The most offensive riders under
consideration would damage natural resources, cut programs for
schools and the poor and impose mischievous new curbs on abortion
and contraception.


   The reason for the latest battle is that Republicans in Congress
have been mired in their own budget disputes all year, with
hard-line conservatives favoring domestic spending cuts, moderates
loath to provoke a veto by Clinton and their leaders reluctant to
hand him a fight that draws attention from his sex scandal.


   In a sign of Clinton's continued leverage, the Republicans caved
in Tuesday on the ill-advised $80 billion tax cut approved last
month in the House, which was to have been paid for out of this
year's budget surplus. The question now is whether they will come
to their senses on other destructive measures.


   At a time of grave financial crisis around the world, for
instance, it would be foolish to reject full funding for the
International Monetary Fund, which the Senate has already approved.
House Republicans should also back down on cuts in education
programs, fuel assistance for low-income people and gratuitous
gestures like the attempts to weaken the Federal Election
Commission or limit contraceptive coverage in federal employee
health benefits.


   As they have done in the past, Western Republicans in the Senate
have added more than 20 last-minute riders to the Interior
Department spending bill that would weaken protections for
fisheries, wilderness areas and national forests. House Republicans
have badly shortchanged the Everglades restoration program. Can
lawmakers be so out of touch that they would try to capitalize on
the president's political difficulties for a backdoor attack on the
environment?


   One of the more absurd contentions by Republicans is that they
need to cut programs to make funds available for such emergencies
as assistance to farmers, the troops in Bosnia and the crash
program to update the government's computers for the year 2000. But
Congress has long recognized that emergencies may be met without
cuts in spending elsewhere.


   In the spending and environmental areas, at least, Clinton has
set out the right priorities. He should stick to them even if it
means vetoing unacceptable legislation and provoking a fight that
lawmakers do not want.



   WASHINGTON _ With three days until temporary financing of the
government expires, Republican leaders met Wednesday night with
White House officials in their first high-level attempt to resolve
dozens of spending issues and avoid a government shutdown.


   The unresolved issues include financing for the International
Monetary Fund, how to conduct the 2000 census, and billions of
dollars in extra spending for items that the administration deems
emergencies, like the peacekeeping mission in Bosnia, the year 2000
computer bug, and disaster relief for farmers.


   Speaker Newt Gingrich, Sen. Trent Lott and Rep. Dick Armey, the
majority leader, were hashing out the details behind closed doors
in the speaker's office with Erskine Bowles, President Clinton's
chief of staff, John Podesta, the deputy chief of staff, and
Lawrence Stein, the administration's liaison with Congress.


   During a dinner break, Bowles expressed some confidence that
both sides could reach agreement but said they would be working all
night.


   ``I think we made some reasonable progress, in general,'' he
said, adding, ``I think we've got a chance.''


   But he said that no specific issues had been resolved and
suggested none would be until both sides could define the entire
scope of what they wanted. ``Nothing is resolved until everything
is resolved,'' he said.


   At the same time, the Republican leaders were trying to smooth
over differences in their own ranks to speed the process along.
Over the squawking of both moderates and conservatives, House
leaders stripped out four controversial provisions from the
nettlesome bill that finances the Treasury Department and the
Postal Service.


   The provisions sought to weaken the Federal Election Commission,
required the government, to provide health insurance coverage for
contraceptives for female federal workers, to block amnesty for
40,000 Haitians living in the United States and to set federal
standards for child care.


   Last week, so many House members were so upset with these
provisions that they blocked the bill from being debated on the
House floor by a vote of 294-106. But Wednesday night, in a vote of
231-194 along almost strictly party lines, they approved the
procedures and paved the way toward passage on the floor.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   Rep. Nita Lowey, D-N.Y., who had shepherded the contraceptive
measure through the House, was upset that Republican leaders simply
tossed it out in the final bill even though it had passed the full
House twice before and a similar measure had cleared the Senate
unanimously by voice vote.


   ``The Republican leaders should be ashamed of themselves,'' she
said. ``They have stomped all over democracy today in their rush to
kow-tow to their right wing.''


   This is a familiar theme among Democrats _ that the Republican
leaders are beholden to their conservative rank and file. But this
is increasingly not the case. As the legislative session hurtles
toward its conclusion, almost nothing from the conservative agenda
has advanced beyond symbolic votes on the House floor.


   Leaders have quite pointedly not held up the spending bills to
advance these causes, spurning conservatives equally with moderates
in the interests of reaching agreements and avoiding a government
shutdown so that they can keep the spotlight on impeachment
proceedings for Clinton.


   On the Senate side, Republicans were preparing for final passage
of the bill financing Veterans Affairs and the Housing and Urban
Affairs Department. That would bring the number of spending bills
Congress has completed action on to six, with seven remaining.


   Most of those are expected to be wrapped into one big omnibus
package, perhaps by Saturday, although the negotiations with the
White House Wednesday evening could change everything.



   WASHINGTON _ Republican congressional leaders presented the
Clinton administration Thursday with a list of lending conditions
that they want imposed on the International Monetary Fund in order
for Congress to approve $18 billion in new money for the IMF.


   Administration and congressional officials said they were
hopeful that they could soon agree on compromise legislation to
provide the money to the IMF to refill reserve accounts depleted by
the fund's attempts to bail out the economies of Russia and three
Asian nations.


   But they said they were still without a timetable for an
agreement. Citing the turmoil in international financial markets,
the White House has insisted that the legislation be approved and
sent to the president before Congress adjourns for the year, which
could happen this weekend.


   While the list of conditions being sought by the Republicans was
not made public, congressional officials said it included a demand
that the IMF open its books for public scrutiny, that it end the
practice of lending to foreign governments at below-market interest
rates, and that it shorten the lending period on most loans.


   The list was presented to Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin during
a meeting Thursday on Capitol Hill with the Senate majority leader,
Trent Lott, R-Miss., and House Speaker Newt Gingrich of Georgia.


   After the meeting, Rubin told reporters that it had gone well.
``It was a good meeting,'' he said. ``It was very constructive and
we're just going to keep working forward.''


   Administration officials say the White House is reluctant to
accept any legislation that imposes onerous lending conditions on
the IMF, especially at a time when the fund needs flexibility to
avert a global financial meltdown.


   The Senate has already approved the full $18 billion in new fund
financing requested by the Clinton administration. But the House
has balked at the request and has so far approved only $3.4
billion.


   The talks this week are aimed at satisfying House Republican
leaders, who are being pressed by conservatives within their party
who have questioned whether the economic crisis that has swept the
third world is evidence that the monetary fund has outlived its
usefulness.


   ``I have been as critical about the IMF as many, but given the
crisis we have around the world, the U.S. needs to provide
leadership,'' said Rep. John Boehner of Ohio, a key Republican in
the talks.


   He said that given the chaos in international financial markets,
the United States was left with no option but to provide the money
to the fund. ``The only real avenue is the IMF,'' he said.


   Congressional officials say the House leadership has shown a new
willingness to resolve the monetary fund issue _ and to end a
variety of other financing disputes with the White House _ in hopes
of preventing a government shutdown that might distract public
attention away from the impeachment investigation of President
Clinton.


   Moreover, if the United States fails to provide the money other
nations might reduce their contributions, leaving the fund short of
the $90 billion it says is needed to deal with the current world
financial crisis.



   WASHINGTON _ Budget negotiations faltered Friday, prompting
Congress to delay until midnight Monday its deadline for passing a
spending bill to keep the government open.


   Republican leaders vowed they would not let the government shut
down. At the same time, many rank-and-file members of Congress,
suffering from impeachment fatigue and anxious to get home to
campaign for the Nov. 3 elections, fled Capitol Hill temporarily
Friday night in an acknowledgment that any resolution was in the
hands of Republican leaders and the White House. They are subject
to return at the call of their leaders to vote on a final package,
probably not before Monday.


   Meanwhile the chairmen of the spending committees and Republican
leaders engaged in on-and-off negotiations with the White House.
The two sides met twice Friday and were working Friday night, but
little overt progress was made on the spending bills as the process
devolved into a political blame game, with each side trying to
control the message that goes out to voters.


   President Clinton said that Republicans were not providing
enough money for his education initiatives, including measures to
hire teachers and repair schools.


   ``This budget is purely and simply a test of whether after nine
months of doing nothing, we are going to do the right thing about
our children's future,'' the president said.


   Rep. Robert Livingston, R-La., chairman of the Appropriations
Committee, responded that he was astounded to see the president on
television complaining about Republicans when the White House had
failed to propose cuts in domestic spending to make up for the
billions of dollars that the president was seeking for his own
proposals.


   Republicans were keenly aware that the president had
successfully blamed them for previous government shutdowns, in 1995
and 1996, and were determined Friday not to let that happen again.


   As the negotiations stalled, Livingston asserted, ``There's not
going to be a shutdown.''


   The Republicans were responding not only to the president but to
a prevailing sense on Capitol Hill that their leaders were giving
in to the administration's demands behind the scenes in order to
make a quick break from Washington and leave with the political
focus on the impending impeachment inquiry.


   Democrats appeared more eager to draw out the endgame and were
advancing the view that Republicans, in their haste to capitalize
on the president's woes in their re-election campaigns, were being
careless about the budget.


   ``They're cutting out on everything because they want to get out
of here,'' said Rep. Bill Delahunt, D-Mass. ``The impeachment stuff
has been draining on the whole institution. It's been sucking all
the air out.''


   Rep. Jennifer Dunn, R-Wash., emerged from a closed-door meeting
of her colleagues saying she was ``disappointed that the president
has put us on the defense.''


   But really, said Rep. John Boehner of Ohio, a member of the
Republican leadership, Republicans ``want to stay here and work,
work, work.''


   A top Republican aide who spoke on the condition of anonymity
put the message in plain English: ``We're not going to give them
the ability to say it's our fault.''


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   But that is precisely the message that Clinton and Democratic
leaders tried to convey, portraying the Republicans as blocking
bills concerning health care, campaign finance and the minimum
wage, even though these measures are not directly related to the 13
must-pass spending bills that keep the government going.


   Only two of those bills have been signed into law. Four others
have been sent to the president, and he has vetoed one. The current
negotiations are over several contentious items in the remaining
seven bills, which are likely to be wrapped up into one big omnibus
bill and presented to the president next week.


   The Senate added to that bloated omnibus Friday by killing the
bill financing the Treasury Department and U.S. Postal Service.


   Friday's deadline extension is the second that Congress has
sought in two weeks. The first took Congress through Friday night,
even though the new fiscal year began Oct. 1.


   In other action Friday, the House approved, 300-125, legislation
overhauling the bankruptcy code, but the legislation still faced
the threat of a veto from the White House and opposition from
Senate Democrats who said it failed to rein in abusive credit card
lending and marketing practices. Friday night, however, Democrats
withdrew a filibuster threat that would have killed the bill.


   Sen. Richard Durbin, D-Ill. said the Democrats had relented
after Sen. Trent Lott, the majority leader, told them he would not
pass the freestanding bill but instead try to include it in the
omnibus spending measure needed to end the congressional session.



   WASHINGTON _ With the Republican plan for a big tax cut having
died without coming to a vote in the Senate, Congress scrambled
Friday to put together a far smaller tax package that could win
bipartisan support.


   After giving up hope that the Senate would act on an $80
billion, five-year Republican tax cut plan passed last month by the
House, the House Ways and Means Committee on Friday hurriedly
considered and then passed, on a unanimous voice vote, a narrow
bill to address some of the tax issues that both parties consider
most pressing.


   The package would extend a series of expiring tax credits,
accelerate an existing plan to allow self-employed people to deduct
100 percent of their health-insurance premiums and provide a break
to farmers who are hard hit by a downturn in agricultural prices.


   Rep. Bill Archer, R-Texas, the committee's chairman, said he
hoped that the bill would sail through the House, be adopted by the
Senate and be signed into law by President Clinton.


   The committee's plan, which could be voted on by the full House
as soon as Saturday, would cost $5.1 billion over five years and
$9.2 billion over 10 years. Unlike the original House plan, which
called for the $80 billion tax cut to be paid for out of projected
budget surpluses, the package approved Friday would be paid for by
raising other taxes.


   But Archer's plan quickly hit a roadblock when the Senate
Finance Committee decided to draft its own legislation, which
differs in several small but important respects from the House
version. With Congress racing to deal with a long list of issues
before adjourning next week for the midterm elections, the
measure's fate in the Senate remained uncertain.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   The end-of-session wrangling over small-bore and largely
technical tax issues was a long way from what Republicans had hoped
for throughout much of the year.


   Emboldened by projections that the federal budget surplus would
rise substantially in the coming years, they debated cutting taxes
by hundreds of billions of dollars before scaling back their
aspirations in the face of strong opposition from the president,
congressional Democrats and some moderates within their own party.


   Even the $80 billion five-year plan passed by the House, though,
ran afoul of Clinton's demand that Congress set aside any budget
surpluses until the nation settles on a plan to deal with the
Social Security system's looming financial problems.


   Senate Republicans, in particular, feared that supporting any
tax cut that relied on the budget surplus would lead Democrats to
accuse them of endangering Social Security.


   Senate Republicans never formally declared the $80 billion
package dead, with Majority Leader Trent Lott hinting all week that
he might still schedule a vote. But most Republicans have
acknowledged for some time that the bill would never pass the
Senate, largely because the parliamentary rules under which the
legislation would be considered would require 60 votes for it to
succeed. Republicans hold 55 seats in the Senate.


   The measure passed by the Ways and Means Committee would extend,
to the end of next year, a research and development tax credit
strongly favored by business executives. The Senate Finance
Committee's version would extend the credit only until the middle
of next year, but would also extend a number of other credits not
addressed by the House bill.


   Both the House and Senate versions would pay for the tax
reductions they include largely by closing a loophole used by real
estate investment trusts.



   WASHINGTON _ The Clinton administration has begun to consult
foreign governments about changes that will be demanded of the
International Monetary Fund under a deal with Congress to provide
the fund with $18 billion, administration and congressional
officials said Sunday. The administration requested the infusion of
capital to deal with the global economic crisis.


   Officials said compromise legislation now being hammered out by
the White House and Republican congressional leaders would provide
full financing for the fund, but would also demand greater openness
in its decision-making and new restrictions on its loans.


   The fund has traditionally made its decisions about loans to
foreign governments in secret.


   The White House has portrayed the $18 billion as vital to the
IMF as it seeks to avert an international financial meltdown. After
a weekend of negotiations, White House officials and members of
Congress said they were optimistic about a deal as part of a larger
budget agreement that is meant to prevent a shutdown of the federal
government.


   ``There has been constructive bipartisan discussion,'' said Gene
Sperling, President Clinton's national economic adviser. ``All
parties are increasingly confident that both full funding and
substantial reforms will be part of the final agreement.''


   Rep. David Obey, D-Wis., who is involved in the negotiations,
said he believed a deal would be announced soon. ``You can see a
solution to that on the horizon,'' he said, describing the talks on
the fund as the ``one area'' in the budget talks ``where we're
moving much closer to agreement.''


   The details of the compromise have not been made public, and
administration and congressional officials said at least a handful
of issues remained unresolved, specifically about the type of
lending conditions that the United States can try to impose.


   House Republicans, who had blocked all but $3.4 billion of the
$18 billion request, have been seeking a variety of changes in how
the fund is run, including an end to loans at below-market interest
rates and a requirement that loans be repaid within a year.
Republican leaders say new lending conditions would provide more
incentive to foreign governments to pursue sound economic policies.


   The administration has warned that some of the demands made by
congressional Republicans would be impossible to force on the IMF,
which has 182 members.


   Administration and congressional officials said the
administration had begun to consult with other nations that are key
donors to head off the possibility that the IMF might balk at new
lending conditions.


   The $18 billion from the United States would replenish accounts
depleted by the fund's efforts to bail out the economies of Russia
and three Asian nations. Other important donor nations are waiting
for Washington to act before chipping in their shares.


   (STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   Rep. Dick Armey of Texas, the House Republican majority leader,
said on the ABC News program ``This Week'' that the talks between
the White House and Congress were still a ``very rigorous
business.''


   He did not predict when the deal might be reached. ``We're
working out the details now,'' he said. ``We're working hard on the
language and we'll just have to see.''


   Armey led efforts in the House earlier this year to block full
financing for the IMF, and on Sunday he repeated the criticism
often heard on Capitol Hill, from both Republicans and Democrats,
that the fund had mishandled the financial crisis that has swept
across much of the world in recent months.


   ``There seems to be now a growing consensus of understanding,
even given lip service by the president himself, that the IMF has
very likely done more harm in places like Thailand and Russia than
they've done good,'' he said.


   ``Everybody understands the IMF can have American tax dollars if
the IMF is responsible and productive in the world economy,'' Armey
said. ``But we will not continue to give them money to do the kind
of harm they've done. If you've got a fire, you don't subsidize the
arsonist.''

