
	   NAIROBI, Kenya (AP) _ Solemn-faced Kenyans whose relatives were
killed in the terrorist bombing of a U.S. Embassy collected
benefits on Friday they said failed to compensate for their losses.
	   ``It's not enough, nothing could be enough,'' Beatrice Akoth
Yongo, a widow with four young children and another due in
December, said in the shade of a flowering jacaranda tree.
	   Attorney-General Amos Wako, representing the government at the
gathering of 100 in downtown Uhuru Park, acknowledged with regret,
``This is peanuts for someone who has died.''
	   Yongo was one of 31 relatives paid 100,000 Kenyan shillings
(dlrs 1,667) each from donations that have reached 228 million
Kenyan shillings (dlrs 3.8 million).
	   They came, some from days away, and wore their Sunday best.
Several shed tears as they accepted checks from smiling officials
offering condolences.
	   In the coming days, more of the 213 Kenyan families who lost a
relative will be compensated, said Charles Njonjo, chairman of the
National Disaster Emergency Fund.
	   Many families previously received an immediate payment of 50,000
Kenyan shillings (dlrs 833) for burial expenses. Additional
payments will be made, if money becomes available, Njonjo said.
	   A total of 248 people, including a dozen Americans, were killed
in the Nairobi bombing on Aug. 7. A twin attack on the U.S. Embassy
in neighboring Tanzania killed 11 people, all Africans.
	   Compensation later will be paid to the most seriously injured
among more than 5,400 people who were hurt in Kenya, mostly
passersby sliced by flying debris, Njonjo said. Amounts have not
been determined.
	   Nearly two months after the bombings, many people still need
physical and psychological help, and not enough is being provided,
aid agencies say.
	   ``The needs are very serious and we keep identifying more and
more as the days go by,'' said Amimo Agola of the Bomb Relief
Support Unit, an umbrella group for all nongovernmental agencies
assisting bomb victims.
	   A total of 17 people remain in hospital for treatment of serious
physical injuries, including broken limbs and backs and
amputations, the National Disaster Operations Center said.
	   Another 200 people need reconstructive surgery, Agola said.
Meanwhile, mangled eyelids are failing to protect otherwise
undamaged eyes, hands with severed tendons are turning into useless
claws.
	   Patients, although unable to work and lacking medical insurance,
must now pay for treatment that initially was free.
	   Most rehabilitation programs need money, too, Agola said.
	   For example, 97 people were fully or partially blinded by flying
glass and debris, and need training that the Kenya Society for the
Blind can't always afford to provide. Many patients can't afford to
buy the powerful eyeglasses they need.
	   ``The greatest need is that many, many of us have been
psychologically traumatized, and very, very few are receiving
help,'' Agola said.
	   Businesses have started to fire people who have not yet returned
to work because they are still upset by the bombing, she said.
	   Especially heartbreaking are the pleas from people who say
they've lost the family's only breadwinner.
	   In Kenya, as in much of Africa, strong ties of the extended
family _ and the enormous disparity between earnings in the city
and the countryside _ make it common for one urban breadwinner to
be the main source of support for dozens of other family members.
	   The government's social welfare system is hopelessly inadequate,
and life insurance is a luxury of the rich.
	   Some people were angry at the paucity of assistance.
	   ``This is nothing,'' Esther Dalizu said, waving a compensation
check. Her dead sister was a senior bank employee who had earned
the same amount in just a few months. ``The loss cannot be
compensated.''
	   Dalizu said she planned to save the money for the education of
her sister's 11-year-old daughter.
	   Yongo, 32, said without her husband's salary the family now must
live on her earnings of less than half as much. After she pays the
rent on a government-subsidized apartment, she has just 1,200
shillings (dlrs 20) per month to feed her brood, pay utilities and
school fees.
	   ``It has been so difficult,'' she said, blotting away a tear.
Relatives cannot afford to help her.
	   Yongo is afraid her husband's dream of university educations for
their children has died with him. ``This makes me even sadder,''
she said.
	   (kjd)

	   MUNICH, Germany (AP) _ U.S. prosecutors have asked for a 20-day
extension to provide Germany with paperwork necessary to extradite
a top lieutenant of Saudi terrorist suspect Osama bin Laden,
officials said Saturday.
	   Mamdouh Mahmud Salim, 40, of Sudan, has been jailed since his
arrest near Munich on Sept. 16 by Bavarian authorities acting on a
U.S. warrant.
	   Under German law, U.S. officials have 40 days after the arrest
to turn over supporting evidence so a German court can rule on
their extradition request. A Bavarian Justice Ministry spokesman,
Gerhard Zierl, said U.S. authorities a few days ago asked the court
hearing the case for an extra 20 days to provide the necessary
material.
	   Quoting unidentified Bavarian law enforcement sources, Focus
newsmagazine reported Saturday that the evidence turned over so far
was not very strong. The magazine said much of it was based on the
testimony of an FBI informant, a former bin Laden associate, who
made only vague connections between Salim and terrorist activities.
	   Zierl declined to comment on the report, but said U.S.
authorities probably asked for more time just a precautionary
measure.
	   U.S. authorities charge Salim helped finance, train and arm
members of a terrorist organization, including the alleged bombers
of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
	   A criminal complaint unsealed Sept. 25 in U.S. District Court in
New York charges him with murder conspiracy and use of weapons of
mass destruction.
 &UR; (pfg-cb)


   WASHINGTON _ The United States has obtained new evidence to link
the owner of a Sudanese factory destroyed in a U.S. cruise missile
strike last month to a terrorist group backed by Osama bin Laden,
the suspected mastermind of the bombings of two U.S. embassies in
East Africa, according to U.S. intelligence officials.


   The evidence, the officials said last week, shows that Salih
Idris, the owner of Al Shifa pharmaceutical plant in Khartoum, has
had financial dealings with members of Islamic Jihad, an
Egypt-based group responsible for the assassination there of
President Anwar Sadat in 1981. Islamic Jihad, in turn, receives
money and sponsorship from bin Laden and has been absorbed into his
terror network, the officials added.


   This evidence was uncovered after the United States destroyed
Idris' factory in a missile attack following the bombing of the
U.S. embassies, the officials said.


   A spokesman for Idris denied the accusations, saying Idris had
no ties either to bin Laden or to any Islamic terrorist groups. In
a statement provided by Tim Pendry, his London-based adviser, Idris
said: ``I have absolutely no relationship with any Islamic
terrorist organization anywhere in the world. I have never met Mr.
bin Laden, I have never spoken with him, I have never had any
financial or business relationship with him, nor knowingly with
anyone acting as his agent.''


   U.S. officials say they have also received new reports of an
increase in the Iraqi presence in Sudan since the missile attack.
Officials said they were not certain what the Iraqis were now doing
in Khartoum. But intelligence agents previously obtained evidence
that the manager of the Shifa plant made frequent trips to Iraq,
where he visited the head of the chemical weapons program. In
addition, a soil sample that the CIA clandestinely took at the
Shifa plant showed the presence of a chemical used in the
production of VX nerve gas, a process used only by Iraq.


   The new evidence comes as President Clinton faces attack over
his decision to strike the Shifa plant. Some State Department and
CIA officials have objected to the decision, arguing that it was
based on tenuous evidence of a connection between the plant and bin
Laden.


   The criticism is also based on the suspicion that the United
States has poor data on Sudan, as the CIA station there has been
closed since 1995 and the entire U.S. Embassy since 1996. In
addition, more than 100 intelligence reports from a CIA informer in
Sudan were withdrawn in January 1996 because they proved to be
fabrications. That year a second informer warned of several
terrorist threats, including one against Anthony Lake, then the
national security adviser, but his reports proved impossible to
confirm.


   Senior administration officials say that at the time of the
cruise missile strike they had evidence of Sudan's involvement with
bin Laden in a chemical weapons program, but no direct evidence
linking the Shifa plant directly to that effort. Now they say that
the new evidence against Idris has confirmed their initial
suspicions about Al Shifa.


   At the time of the Aug. 20 cruise missile attack, Clinton
administration officials acknowledge, they did not know that Idris
owned the Shifa factory. The CIA, which had begun to scrutinize the
plant 18 months earlier, believed the plant's ownership was
irrelevant.


   ``What we knew about the ownership was that a lot of it couldn't
be reliably established,'' said one senior U.S. intelligence
official.


   Still, after the missile strike, when Idris was publicly
identified as the owner, U.S. intelligence began to investigate his
possible connections to chemical weapons and terrorism. A Sudanese
expatriate who now lives in Jidda, Saudi Arabia, Idris, 46, was
previously a senior manager of the National Commercial Bank of
Saudi Arabia. He bought the Shifa plant in March.


   Officials say U.S. intelligence has received reports that Idris
launders money for international Islamic groups, and that he also
has a stake in a company in Sudan that is 40 percent owned by the
Military Industrial Corporation, a government entity that the
United States says controls Sudanese chemical weapons development.


   Bin Laden has helped finance the Military Industrial Corp. in
his effort to use Sudan as a base for chemical weapons production,
and talked to Sudanese leaders about testing poisonous gases
against U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia, according to U.S.
intelligence.


   But Pendry denied that Idris owned any businesses with the
Military Industrial Corp.


   U.S. intelligence officials declined to provide details about
the reports of Idris' financial dealings with members of Islamic
Jihad. But they said that Islamic Jihad had now been consolidated
into bin Laden's terrorist campaign.



   MORONI, Comoros _ The man accused of directing the bomb attack
on the American Embassy in Kenya came of age in this impoverished
Indian Ocean archipelago, a land where gifted teen-agers leave home
to enroll in the radical Islamic academies of Libya, Sudan and
Pakistan.


   A tightly wound, brilliant student of the Koran who was thrown
out of religious school for caning a lazy pupil hard enough to draw
blood, Abdallah Mohammed Fazul set out for Pakistan 11 years ago,
at age 15, to continue his education.


   Sometime over the next few years, American authorities assert,
he fell under the sway of terrorists waging what they call a holy
war against the United States. He was transformed into a killer who
could coolly execute a bombing that left 250 people dead.


   He is still at large after being indicted in the United States
under an alias, Haroun Fazil, which he apparently used in Kenya. As
the object of a worldwide manhunt, he has a $2 million reward on
his head.


   The stark portrait of him as a terrorist baffles his wife, his
Koran teacher and relatives in Comoros, a country with a relatively
liberal Muslim character. Even relatives who admit that he had a
darker side say his religious fervor seemed limited to mundane
things like animosity to television and threats to chase family
members into the street if he caught them drinking beer.


   Nearly two months after the bombings of the American Embassies
in Kenya and Tanzania, a picture of those charged in the case is
slowly emerging. They lived in different countries, labored in
various professions but shared a devotion to radical Islam and a
striking ability to keep family and friends in the dark about what
American prosecutors say were their true activities.


   Comoran officials express embarrassment that Fazil has turned
the world's eyes on them. But they say he is a true product of the
forces that shaped his tropical nation _ poverty, Islam, racism and
French colonialism. He is one of thousands of young Comorans who
have been forced by the lack of higher education to leave these
strange and beautiful islands, where the world's largest volcanic
crater meets startling aquamarine waves, where huge bats flit
between the palm trees by day and the moon glows vividly at night,
especially during power blackouts.


   They study far away, in harsh desert lands where the path to
holy martyrdom and the path to a bit of cash for a suffering family
back home are the same: Join the legions of the Islamic Jihad.


   The indictments filed so far suggest that Fazil was no ordinary
legionnaire, but a highly intelligent, natural leader who played a
central role in the bomb plot.


   His wife's extended family lives in a yellow cinder-block
building behind a one-room Islamic school on an alley paved only
with sharp pumice. They graciously welcomed two journalists into
their threadbare rooms, offered coffee and talked for three hours.


   His wife, a first cousin who married him five years ago and
lived with him in Sudan and Kenya, called him a hard-working
computer student and said he sometimes disappeared for weeks at a
time. His big brother said he had been a gentle, sometimes boastful
child who could ``smurf-dance like Michael Jackson'' and never said
anything about hating America.


   When pressed, those who knew him said in so many words that they
did not know him very well. His siblings did not see him for years
at a time, his wife does not expect a message even though he has
been gone more than a month, and his old teachers say he never
visited. Each said, ``He has no friends I know of.''


   According to the FBI, Fazil headed the Kenya cell of Al Qaeda,
the terror network founded by Osama bin Laden, an exiled Saudi
businessman. It says Fazil rented the room where the bomb was
assembled and drove the white pickup that guided it to the embassy.


   On Aug. 14, a week after the Nairobi blast, he flew here. He
visited relatives and his local mosque.


   On Aug. 22, Fazil took a flight to Dubai. He had a ticket onward
to Pakistan, but it went unused, and he disappeared. His family
says he left without explaining, as was his custom, and they drove
him to the airport.


   Tipped off by Nairobi telephone records that showed calls to a
Moroni number, investigators descended on the family home on Sept.
2. The Comoran gendarmes were accompanied by FBI agents with
pistols and radio headsets, ``just like Delta Force'' said an
uncle.


   They took his brother, Omar, as well as his wife, Halima
Badroudine Fazul, 22, and sister-in-law, Nabatte Fazul, 19, in for
questioning. They also seized two computers, diskettes, a camera,
CDs and tapes, old letters, passports and birth certificates, two
Korans, piles of old Newsweek and Time magazines and Kenyan
newspapers, rubber stamps, most of the clothing of the family's men
and some belonging to women and children.


   The day of the search ended badly. ``The FBI behaved correctly _
they were not threatening,'' said Halima Fazul. ``But the Comoran
gendarmes tipped my father out of bed to search it, even though he
had a catheter in him.''


   They banged on the ceiling over his bed with their gun butts,
she said. On her way back from the police station that evening, she
was told that her father, who had been suffering from a bleeding
ulcer, was collapsing. She ran, stumbling in the dark. ``He took my
hand and said, `Ah, Halima, you're back,''' and died, she said.


   When asked about that later, a prosecutor and a ranking gendarme
both shrugged, saying they were unaware that the older man had
heart trouble.


   No complete listing of the evidence against Fazil has been
issued _ some may still be being tested by the FBI _ but threads
can be pieced together from interviews.


   Fazil had passports or ID documents from countries that he is
not a citizen of, apparently including Kenya and France, and stamps
for forging others.


   The Kenyan newspapers he had kept were mostly about the bombing,
an investigator said.


   There was a list of prominent Comorans who would have to be
killed to make way for fundamentalist rule.


   Investigators also found a letter he wrote in 1991, when he was
19, to his brother Omar, then 24, in which he boasted that he had
been trained to use explosives and fire machine guns.


   nn


   Asked his reaction, Omar Fazul, an English teacher, said: ``I
was impressed _ but I considered it childish. I thought he was
boasting. I didn't believe him.''


   Omar Fazul said he never discussed religion, politics or
military service with his brother. ``We talk only about family
problems,'' he said. ``It has never been proved to me that my
brother is an Islamist. He wears jeans and boots.''


   Fazil was born in 1973, the youngest of six, just before his
parents separated. He began Koranic studies at 4 with an uncle and
at 7 began studying with a professional teacher, Fundi Twawilou
Abdulfateh. By the age of 9, he knew the Koran by heart and was
giving religious instructions on the radio.


   He was so smart, another relative said, that he was in third
grade while his older sister was in first. He played soccer and the
flute and could do a standing flip. As a teen-ager, he showed off
with kung-fu fighting sticks and called himself James Bond.


   He also had moments of rage. He got into a fistfight with a
teacher at his French public school, and slammed younger students
down in their chairs when they failed at Koran recital.


   ``He sometimes had a strange attitude,'' Fundi Twawilou said.
``On the soccer field, he would provoke fights with bigger guys.
When that guy would go to beat him, he would run away. So Omar, his
brother, would be beaten. But Omar has crippled feet, so Abdallah
would return to fight for him.''


   At age 11, he cut another pupil's ear. Asked to leave, he
studied for two years with Fundi Mohammed Ali, an older teacher,
who remembers him as ``brilliant, respectful to others, deeply
religious and very calm.''


   At 14, he switched to a school run by Fundi Soidiki Mbapandza,
one of the leading Islamic fundamentalists here, before leaving for
Pakistan. Outside the tin walls of that school compound, girls and
young women enter through one door, carefully avoiding eye contact
with the opposite sex, while male students glower aggressively at
visitors. Fundi Soidiki, who was questioned by the police, declined
several requests for an interview.


   The most militant strains of fundamentalism are almost unknown
in Comoros. The islands are 99 percent Sunni Muslim, and many men
wear ankle-length shirts and Arab-style caps, while almost all
women wrap scarves around their bodies, legs and heads. But the
atmosphere is relaxed _ the scarves often merely adorn Western
dresses and few women hide their faces or hair. Speaking of Fazil,
Justice Minister Mohammed Abdou Mmadi said, ``Mr. Fazul learned a
different culture abroad. It would be impossible for a Comoran who
grew up here to become a terrorist.''


   The islands are very poor, with a gross domestic product of $470
per person. Tourists _ mostly divers _ are few, and 80 percent of
the local people are subsistence farmers and fishermen.


   Because scholarships to France have dried up, many accept the
meager ones offered by religious colleges in Pakistan, Egypt, Sudan
and Libya, where they are recruited by fundamentalists.


   ``There are thousands of Haroun Fazils all over the world,
recruited into the foreign legion of Libya and the armies of
Iran,'' warned Said Hilali Moussa, chief of President Abdoulkarim
Taki's cabinet.


   Many families get only one letter from their departed sons, said
a tourism official. It says they are safe, living in a hostel.
``Then they don't hear from them for years, and they they find out
they are in the army. Lots end up fighting in Afghanistan.''


   Something like that happened to Fazil. ``When he came back from
Pakistan,'' a relative said, ``he told his mother he wanted to go
into the army. She told him, `It is up to you.'''


   After that he became more of a mystery. He was trained,
presumably in Afghanistan, and has lived in Sudan, Kenya and
perhaps in Yemen. He comes home only for short visits, never leaves
an address and calls from pay phones.


   Five years ago, on a brief visit, he went with his father to
Moheli Island to meet his uncle for the first time. His cousins
Halima, 17, and Nabatte, 14, were there. ``We were eating, and not
well dressed, so we were embarrassed,'' Halima Fazul recalled. ``We
ran inside to change.'' At the end of the day, he had his father
ask for her hand.


   Mrs. Fazul used to go fully veiled, with only her eyes showing,
relatives said, and neighbors in Kenya said the same thing. But
when she went out visiting in Comoros, she wore her scarf off her
face and was unfazed when her young son pulled it off in front of
male visitors.


   Her husband used to wear the traditional long shirts but now
wears trousers and sometimes a suit. When teased about the Western
dress by his father, a relative said, he pointed at his heart and
replied: ``Proving you fear God is not in your clothes. It's in
here.''


   He now has money, relatives said. He sends some home, and last
year paid half the cost for his mother to go to Paris for cancer
treatment. His wife cannot identify his boss or say exactly what he
does, except work on computers. ``He goes away at 8 and comes back
at 6,'' she said. ``I don't know what he does outside.''


   She denied having heard of bin Laden before the blast and
protested that her husband did not hate Americans. She also gave
him an alibi, saying that at 10:30 a.m. on Aug. 7, when the bomb
went off, he was with her at the Nairobi airport trying to get her
sick father on a plane home.


   There have been accusations that a fundamentalist clique within
the Comoros government might shelter terrorists. Critics note that
the ``hit list'' for local politicians found in Fazil's house
called for killing President Taki's political opponents, but not
him. And local journalists were surprised to hear that Fazil got to
the airport late but boarded the plane in only 15 minutes, as if
someone had cleared his way.


   Moussa, the president's top adviser, called the accusations
ridiculous and said they emanated from political rivals and
separatists. The government, he said, first heard from the FBI on
Aug. 29, a week after Fazil's departure.


   Fundi Twawilou said he still felt like a father to Fazil and did
not believe him guilty.


   ``Abdallah knows good from bad,'' he said. ``He knows that for
planting a bomb that kills 250 innocent people, a Muslim would go
straight to hell.''



   MORONI, Comoros _ The man accused of directing the bomb attack
on the American Embassy in Kenya came of age in this impoverished
Indian Ocean archipelago, a land where gifted teen-agers leave home
to enroll in the radical Islamic academies of Libya, Sudan and
Pakistan.


   A tightly wound, brilliant student of the Koran who was thrown
out of religious school for caning a lazy pupil hard enough to draw
blood, Abdallah Mohammed Fazul set out for Pakistan 11 years ago,
at age 15, to continue his education.


   Sometime over the next few years, American authorities assert,
he fell under the sway of terrorists waging what they call a holy
war against the United States. He was transformed into a killer who
could coolly execute a bombing that left 250 people dead.


   He is still at large after being indicted in the United States
under an alias, Haroun Fazil, which he apparently used in Kenya. As
the object of a worldwide manhunt, he has a $2 million reward on
his head.


   The stark portrait of him as a terrorist baffles his wife, his
Koran teacher and relatives in Comoros, a country with a relatively
liberal Muslim character. Even relatives who admit that he had a
darker side say his religious fervor seemed limited to mundane
things like animosity to television and threats to chase family
members into the street if he caught them drinking beer.


   Nearly two months after the bombings of the American Embassies
in Kenya and Tanzania, a picture of those charged in the case is
slowly emerging. They lived in different countries, labored in
various professions but shared a devotion to radical Islam and a
striking ability to keep family and friends in the dark about what
American prosecutors say were their true activities.


   Comoran officials express embarrassment that Fazil has turned
the world's eyes on them. But they say he is a true product of the
forces that shaped his tropical nation _ poverty, Islam, racism and
French colonialism. He is one of thousands of young Comorans who
have been forced by the lack of higher education to leave these
strange and beautiful islands, where the world's largest volcanic
crater meets startling aquamarine waves, where huge bats flit
between the palm trees by day and the moon glows vividly at night,
especially during power blackouts.


   They study far away, in harsh desert lands where the path to
holy martyrdom and the path to a bit of cash for a suffering family
back home are the same: Join the legions of the Islamic Jihad.


   The indictments filed so far suggest that Fazil was no ordinary
legionnaire, but a highly intelligent, natural leader who played a
central role in the bomb plot.


   His wife's extended family lives in a yellow cinder-block
building behind a one-room Islamic school on an alley paved only
with sharp pumice. They graciously welcomed two journalists into
their threadbare rooms, offered coffee and talked for three hours.


   His wife, a first cousin who married him five years ago and
lived with him in Sudan and Kenya, called him a hard-working
computer student and said he sometimes disappeared for weeks at a
time. His big brother said he had been a gentle, sometimes boastful
child who could ``smurf-dance like Michael Jackson'' and never said
anything about hating America.


   When pressed, those who knew him said in so many words that they
did not know him very well. His siblings did not see him for years
at a time, his wife does not expect a message even though he has
been gone more than a month, and his old teachers say he never
visited. Each said, ``He has no friends I know of.''


   According to the FBI, Fazil headed the Kenya cell of Al Qaeda,
the terror network founded by Osama bin Laden, an exiled Saudi
businessman. It says Fazil rented the room where the bomb was
assembled and drove the white pickup that guided it to the embassy.


   On Aug. 14, a week after the Nairobi blast, he flew here. He
visited relatives and his local mosque.


   On Aug. 22, Fazil took a flight to Dubai. He had a ticket onward
to Pakistan, but it went unused, and he disappeared. His family
says he left without explaining, as was his custom, and they drove
him to the airport.


   Tipped off by Nairobi telephone records that showed calls to a
Moroni number, investigators descended on the family home on Sept.
2. The Comoran gendarmes were accompanied by FBI agents with
pistols and radio headsets, ``just like Delta Force'' said an
uncle.


   They took his brother, Omar, as well as his wife, Halima
Badroudine Fazul, 22, and sister-in-law, Nabatte Fazul, 19, in for
questioning. They also seized two computers, diskettes, a camera,
CDs and tapes, old letters, passports and birth certificates, two
Korans, piles of old Newsweek and Time magazines and Kenyan
newspapers, rubber stamps, most of the clothing of the family's men
and some belonging to women and children.


   The day of the search ended badly. ``The FBI behaved correctly _
they were not threatening,'' said Halima Fazul. ``But the Comoran
gendarmes tipped my father out of bed to search it, even though he
had a catheter in him.''


   They banged on the ceiling over his bed with their gun butts,
she said. On her way back from the police station that evening, she
was told that her father, who had been suffering from a bleeding
ulcer, was collapsing. She ran, stumbling in the dark. ``He took my
hand and said, `Ah, Halima, you're back,''' and died, she said.


   When asked about that later, a prosecutor and a ranking gendarme
both shrugged, saying they were unaware that the older man had
heart trouble.


   No complete listing of the evidence against Fazil has been
issued _ some may still be being tested by the FBI _ but threads
can be pieced together from interviews.


   Fazil had passports or ID documents from countries that he is
not a citizen of, apparently including Kenya and France, and stamps
for forging others.


   The Kenyan newspapers he had kept were mostly about the bombing,
an investigator said.


   There was a list of prominent Comorans who would have to be
killed to make way for fundamentalist rule.


   Investigators also found a letter he wrote in 1991, when he was
19, to his brother Omar, then 24, in which he boasted that he had
been trained to use explosives and fire machine guns.


   nn


   Asked his reaction, Omar Fazul, an English teacher, said: ``I
was impressed _ but I considered it childish. I thought he was
boasting. I didn't believe him.''


   Omar Fazul said he never discussed religion, politics or
military service with his brother. ``We talk only about family
problems,'' he said. ``It has never been proved to me that my
brother is an Islamist. He wears jeans and boots.''


   Fazil was born in 1973, the youngest of six, just before his
parents separated. He began Koranic studies at 4 with an uncle and
at 7 began studying with a professional teacher, Fundi Twawilou
Abdulfateh. By the age of 9, he knew the Koran by heart and was
giving religious instructions on the radio.


   He was so smart, another relative said, that he was in third
grade while his older sister was in first. He played soccer and the
flute and could do a standing flip. As a teen-ager, he showed off
with kung-fu fighting sticks and called himself James Bond.


   He also had moments of rage. He got into a fistfight with a
teacher at his French public school, and slammed younger students
down in their chairs when they failed at Koran recital.


   ``He sometimes had a strange attitude,'' Fundi Twawilou said.
``On the soccer field, he would provoke fights with bigger guys.
When that guy would go to beat him, he would run away. So Omar, his
brother, would be beaten. But Omar has crippled feet, so Abdallah
would return to fight for him.''


   At age 11, he cut another pupil's ear. Asked to leave, he
studied for two years with Fundi Mohammed Ali, an older teacher,
who remembers him as ``brilliant, respectful to others, deeply
religious and very calm.''


   At 14, he switched to a school run by Fundi Soidiki Mbapandza,
one of the leading Islamic fundamentalists here, before leaving for
Pakistan. Outside the tin walls of that school compound, girls and
young women enter through one door, carefully avoiding eye contact
with the opposite sex, while male students glower aggressively at
visitors. Fundi Soidiki, who was questioned by the police, declined
several requests for an interview.


   The most militant strains of fundamentalism are almost unknown
in Comoros. The islands are 99 percent Sunni Muslim, and many men
wear ankle-length shirts and Arab-style caps, while almost all
women wrap scarves around their bodies, legs and heads. But the
atmosphere is relaxed _ the scarves often merely adorn Western
dresses and few women hide their faces or hair. Speaking of Fazil,
Justice Minister Mohammed Abdou Mmadi said, ``Mr. Fazul learned a
different culture abroad. It would be impossible for a Comoran who
grew up here to become a terrorist.''


   The islands are very poor, with a gross domestic product of $470
per person. Tourists _ mostly divers _ are few, and 80 percent of
the local people are subsistence farmers and fishermen.


   Because scholarships to France have dried up, many accept the
meager ones offered by religious colleges in Pakistan, Egypt, Sudan
and Libya, where they are recruited by fundamentalists.


   ``There are thousands of Haroun Fazils all over the world,
recruited into the foreign legion of Libya and the armies of
Iran,'' warned Said Hilali Moussa, chief of President Abdoulkarim
Taki's cabinet.


   Many families get only one letter from their departed sons, said
a tourism official. It says they are safe, living in a hostel.
``Then they don't hear from them for years, and they they find out
they are in the army. Lots end up fighting in Afghanistan.''


   Something like that happened to Fazil. ``When he came back from
Pakistan,'' a relative said, ``he told his mother he wanted to go
into the army. She told him, `It is up to you.'''


   After that he became more of a mystery. He was trained,
presumably in Afghanistan, and has lived in Sudan, Kenya and
perhaps in Yemen. He comes home only for short visits, never leaves
an address and calls from pay phones.


   Five years ago, on a brief visit, he went with his father to
Moheli Island to meet his uncle for the first time. His cousins
Halima, 17, and Nabatte, 14, were there. ``We were eating, and not
well dressed, so we were embarrassed,'' Halima Fazul recalled. ``We
ran inside to change.'' At the end of the day, he had his father
ask for her hand.


   Mrs. Fazul used to go fully veiled, with only her eyes showing,
relatives said, and neighbors in Kenya said the same thing. But
when she went out visiting in Comoros, she wore her scarf off her
face and was unfazed when her young son pulled it off in front of
male visitors.


   Her husband used to wear the traditional long shirts but now
wears trousers and sometimes a suit. When teased about the Western
dress by his father, a relative said, he pointed at his heart and
replied: ``Proving you fear God is not in your clothes. It's in
here.''


   He now has money, relatives said. He sends some home, and last
year paid half the cost for his mother to go to Paris for cancer
treatment. His wife cannot identify his boss or say exactly what he
does, except work on computers. ``He goes away at 8 and comes back
at 6,'' she said. ``I don't know what he does outside.''


   She denied having heard of bin Laden before the blast and
protested that her husband did not hate Americans. She also gave
him an alibi, saying that at 10:30 a.m. on Aug. 7, when the bomb
went off, he was with her at the Nairobi airport trying to get her
sick father on a plane home.


   There have been accusations that a fundamentalist clique within
the Comoros government might shelter terrorists. Critics note that
the ``hit list'' for local politicians found in Fazil's house
called for killing President Taki's political opponents, but not
him. And local journalists were surprised to hear that Fazil got to
the airport late but boarded the plane in only 15 minutes, as if
someone had cleared his way.


   Moussa, the president's top adviser, called the accusations
ridiculous and said they emanated from political rivals and
separatists. The government, he said, first heard from the FBI on
Aug. 29, a week after Fazil's departure.


   Fundi Twawilou said he still felt like a father to Fazil and did
not believe him guilty.


   ``Abdallah knows good from bad,'' he said. ``He knows that for
planting a bomb that kills 250 innocent people, a Muslim would go
straight to hell.''



   NEW YORK _ Federal prosecutors in Manhattan said Wednesday that
one of the men accused of conspiring to bomb the U.S. Embassies in
Kenya and Tanzania in August had met earlier with Osama bin Laden,
the suspected mastermind of the attacks, and ``asked him for a
mission.''


   The reported meeting between bin Laden and the accused man,
Mohamed Rashed Daoud Al'Owhali, which had not previously been
described, is the strongest allegation offered so far to link bin
Laden to the attacks, in which more than 250 people died.


   The meeting, which prosecutors said took place in 1996, is
reported in a new 48-page indictment of Al-'Owhali and three others
that a federal grand jury in Manhattan returned Wednesday. It shows
how prosecutors are continuing to build the circumstantial case
that bin Laden, a Saudi businessman in exile, was behind the
embassy bombings and other attacks against Americans stationed
abroad in the 1990s.


   The prosecutors did not indicate bin Laden's response to the
offer; he is not charged in the new indictment.


   The indictment does not indicate whether prosecutors have any
evidence that bin Laden directly ordered the bombings, or whether
they may argue that he inspired a group of followers to carry out
the attacks. Bin Ladin has called for attacks on U.S. and other
Western interests.


   Nonetheless, in issuing the new charges against men suspected of
being bin Laden's associates, the government also declared more
concretely than previously that bin Laden has been a major backer
of terrorism groups worldwide. Its list of terrorist groups
includes Al Jihad in Egypt and the Islamic Group, which is led by
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, who was convicted in 1996 in the plot to
blow up landmarks in New York City.


   The indictment asserted that bin Laden's organization, Al Qaeda,
worked on its own and through Al Jihad, Islamic Group and others,
which ``operated under its umbrella.''


   The authorities also gave their first account of what they
called bin Laden's network of businesses and front companies in
Sudan that he allegedly used to raise money to support terrorism
and to provide cover for the acquisition of explosives, weapons and
chemicals, and the travel of his associates.



   DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania _ In a rare public statement about the
August bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa, the FBI said
Friday that two vehicles had been used in the attack on the embassy
here.


   The FBI also indicated that it had learned the identities of new
suspects in the blast here, and that they are at large. They were
in a Suzuki Samurai, one of the two vehicles identified Friday,
investigators said.


   Two vehicles were also used in the bombing of the embassy in
Nairobi, according to indictments that have been handed down. One
carried the bomb, the other guided the first vehicle through the
streets of Nairobi to the embassy. Investigators are pursuing the
theory that the modus operandi was the same here.


   One of the vehicles used in the blast here was an Atlas
refrigeration truck made by Nissan, with a silver-colored cargo box
and white or beige cab, the FBI and the Tanzania Criminal
Investigation Division said at a news conference Friday afternoon.


   This was the vehicle that investigators now believe carried the
bomb, which killed 11 people and wounded at least 86. The driver of
the vehicle, who has not been identified, died in the attack,
according to investigators.


   The simultaneous blast in Nairobi killed more than 250,
including 12 Americans. Three people have been indicted in New York
in connection with the attacks, which the Clinton administration
has charged were masterminded by Osama bin Laden, the Saudi exile
who lives in Afghanistan.


   Friday's development should put to rest earlier reports that a
water tanker, which regularly delivered water to the embassy here,
had carried the bomb, an investigator said.


   The refrigeration truck followed the water tanker into the
compound, according to a U.S. security official.


   It is not known how the refrigeration truck, a 1987 Nissan,
penetrated the embassy compound here without being adequately
searched. At Friday's news conference, FBI Agent Ken Maxwell read a
brief statement and declined to take any questions. The head of
Tanzania's Criminal Investigation Division, Adadi Rajabu, read a
similar statement in Swahili, and also declined to take questions.


   The second vehicle was a Suzuki Samurai, a small jeep popular in
East Africa. It had been ``utilized by suspects thus far
identified,'' Maxwell said. He did not say how it had been used or
who the suspects were.


   Tanzania has charged two men in connection with the bombing,
Mustafa Mahmoud Said Ahmed and Rashid Saleh Hemed.


   For reasons that are not clear, the Clinton administration has
not sought to extradite either of these men, even though it has
brought other suspects back to the United States, where they have
been indicted. A diplomat here said the United States did not
consider the evidence against Ahmed to be very strong.


   Since the bombings, the FBI and their counterparts here and in
Kenya have made few public statements.


   Friday's news conference was for the purpose of issuing an
appeal to the Tanzanian public to come forth with any information
about the vehicles, an indication that while the investigators feel
they have made ``a significant amount of progress,'' as Maxwell
said Friday, they are also stymied.



   WASHINGTON _ Urged on by the Clinton administration, Saudi
Arabia's top intelligence official met privately with the leader of
the Taliban in late September to try to persuade Afghanistan to
deport Osama bin Laden, the Saudi exile suspected of masterminding
the August bombings of two American embassies in East Africa,
according to U.S. and Arab officials.


   Just weeks after the United States launched a cruise-missile
strike against bin Laden's terrorist training camps in Afghanistan,
Prince Turki bin Faisal, chief of Saudi intelligence, sat down with
Mullah Mohammed Omar, leader of the Taliban's Supreme Council, and
asked him to end his protection for bin Laden and hand him over,
Arab officials said.


   The Taliban, the Islamic movement that controls most of
Afghanistan, refused. Their recalcitrance in the face of Turki's
personal request finally prompted Saudi Arabia, one of the
Taliban's most important financial sponsors and allies, to
downgrade its diplomatic ties with the group.


   American officials say they are supporting diplomatic efforts to
persuade the Taliban to deport bin Laden. ``Achieving the expulsion
of bin Laden and bringing him to justice is something we are
actively pursuing,'' said a State Department official.


   In their effort to persuade Afghanistan to deport bin Laden,
State Department officials also have spoken to Taliban
representatives themselves and have sought the intercession of
Pakistan, the only other major ally of Afghanistan in the region.


   They have also, said an Arab official, talked to members of bin
Laden's family in Saudi Arabia.


   If Afghanistan does turn over bin Laden to Saudi Arabia, it is
possible that bin Laden might be tried there, rather than in the
United States. If he were to be handed over to the Saudis and
brought back to Saudi Arabia, one Arab official said, he could face
swift execution.


   Administration officials say they want him to face trial in the
United States. They say they asked the Saudis to urge the Taliban
only to deport bin Laden. Senior U.S. officials said they were not
negotiating with the Taliban, but simply repeating the message that
they should get rid of bin Laden.


   ``We've certainly urged, in public and private, all those who
have influence with the Taliban, that it is our strong view bin
Laden should be expelled and brought to justice,'' a White House
spokesman said. ``We will certainly continue our multi-pronged
strategy of combating bin Laden's network.''


   Clinton administration officials said the new diplomatic effort
did not preclude further military action against bin Laden and his
terrorist network. Officials said the Aug. 20 cruise missile attack
was intended to break up the network and perhaps kill bin Laden.
Since then, the FBI and other law-enforcement and intelligence
agencies say they are continuing to work with other nations to
arrest as many of bin Laden's operatives as possible. Bin Laden
already faces criminal charges in the United States under a sealed
indictment handed up by a federal grand jury in New York.


   Pressing the Taliban is part of a broad effort to damage the bin
Laden network, officials say. ``Our tactics may have changed, but
our strategy of putting him out of action remains the same,'' said
a senior American official. ``This is another way of trying to deal
with the problem.''


   But critics outside of government say it also suggests
ambivalence among administration officials over how best to deal
with the radical Islamic group that now controls most of
Afghanistan.


   ``There has been a gap between our interests in Afghanistan and
the level of our attention to the need for a strategy,'' said
Zalmay Khalilzad, an Afghan expert at Rand Corp. ``A rogue state
could emerge there, so we either need to pay attention now, or
later.''


   The Saudi role in trying to extricate bin Laden from Afghanistan
has been a murky one, complicated by Islamic politics and the
longstanding alliance between the Saudis and the Taliban. But the
Saudi request to the Taliban for bin Laden represents a significant
shift.


   Previously, the Saudis had made it clear that they did not want
bin Laden brought back to Saudi Arabia, for fear that he could be a
martyr figure to Saudi dissidents. More broadly, U.S. officials say
they have been frustrated by the Saudis' refusal to cooperate fully
on terrorism investigations in the past, especially in the case of
the 1996 bombing of the American military barracks at Khobar Towers
in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.


   But now, what administration officials say is the clear evidence
of his involvement in the East African bombings, as well as a
growing belief among Saudi officials that bin Laden poses a threat
to their government, seems to have prompted a change in their
strategy.


   And, while he is not currently under indictment for any crimes
in Saudi Arabia, Arab and U.S officials now say they have evidence
linking him to the 1995 car bombing of a military facility in
Riyadh in which American servicemen were killed.


   Bin Laden, who was stripped of his Saudi citizenship in 1994,
would face ``swift'' action if he were brought back to Saudi
Arabia, said one Arab official.


   Now, even bin Laden's wealthy Saudi family is cooperating with
the United States and Saudi Arabia on how to bring him to heel, the
Arab official said. The bin Laden family made a fortune in the
construction industry. ``U.S. officials, after Saudi Arabia blessed
it, have talked to members of the bin Laden family,'' the Arab
official said.


   After Taliban officials repeatedly said they would consider
turning over bin Laden if they were presented with evidence against
him, Arab officials familiar with the matter say that Prince Turki
presented evidence to the Taliban of bin Laden's involvement in
terrorism, but it made no difference. Evidence was also presented
by Bill Richardson, former chief delegate to the United Nations,
when he visited Afghanistan earlier this year.


   But Clinton administration officials, fearing that his return to
Saudi Arabia could lead to trouble for the Saudi regime, stress
they do not want the Saudis to have bin Laden brought back to their
country. And they note that the United States does not have an
extradition treaty with Saudi Arabia. The Clinton administration is
still determined to have bin Laden put on trial in the United
States, they said.


   ``We don't have a policy on whether we would accept bin Laden
being brought to justice in a third country, we haven't crossed
that bridge yet,'' one administration official said. ``But Saudi
Arabia would not be the place where we would want him to go.''


   Abdul Hakeem Mujahid, the Taliban's ambassador designate to the
United Nations, confirmed in an interview that his government's
discussions with Turki over bin Laden had been ``disappointing,''
but argued that Afghanistan's unwillingness to oust its ``guest''
would not damage long-term relations between Afghanistan and Saudi
Arabia. He added that his government would be willing to try bin
Laden in Islamic court in Afghanistan if there was ``solid''
evidence against him.



   NEW YORK _ Several months after the bombing of the World Trade
Center in February 1993, one of the suspects tried to bargain with
federal prosecutors in New York, offering inside information about
the bomb plot in exchange for a lighter sentence.


   The deal never materialized, and the defendant was eventually
found guilty and sentenced to life in prison. But the details he
offered in that secret meeting about his Brooklyn-based circle of
Arab militants are resonating today in another terrorism case.


   The accused bomber told prosecutors that he had twice turned to
a Texas acquaintance named Wadih el Hage to buy weapons for his
Brooklyn associates. Last month, el Hage was arrested on charges of
being part of the Osama bin Laden terror network that is suspected
of the bombing of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania on Aug.
7.


   It is not clear how federal investigators followed up the tip
about el Hage that they received in 1993. But after the embassy
bombings, it is evident that they are ascribing new significance to
el Hage's contacts with the Brooklyn militants who figured not only
in the World Trade Center case, but also in the assassination of
Rabbi Meir Kahane in 1990 and a conspiracy to blow up the United
Nations and other New York landmarks in 1993.


   Indeed, the government recently asserted for the first time that
the roots of bin Laden's organization could be traced, in part, to
a sparsely furnished office on Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn that was
called Alkifah Refugee Center and had for many years been a
gathering place for that same fringe group of terrorists.


   Prosecutors have not said what role, if any, bin Laden is
supposed to have played in the activities of Alkifah Center. Nor
have they said how the center, which has been closed for about five
years, relates to his global campaign to attack Americans overseas.


   But in the government's version so far, bin Laden's far-flung
network is presented as a tapestry of personal relationships
between men of different nationalities and backgrounds who share
his determination to rid the Islamic world of American influence.


   In the United States, prosecutors now suggest, such
relationships evolved from Alkifah Refugee Center.


   In the mid-1980s the strip of Arab restaurants and Islamic
bookstores on Atlantic Avenue, between Third and Fourth streets,
was the first port of call for many immigrants from the Middle East
and North Africa. Notices posted in the shops advertised jobs,
rooms for rent and religious activities for Arabic-speaking
newcomers.


   Alkifah Center, in those years, was a neighborhood hub. It
started out as a desk in Al Farooq Mosque around 1986 and then
moved into a small apartment in a building a few doors away at 566
Atlantic Ave., above what is now a perfume factory, with just
enough room for a desk, a few chairs, a phone and a fax machine.


   The center's stated purpose was to raise money and recruit
fighters to help the U.S.-backed Afghan mujahedeen, who rebelled
against the Communist government in Afghanistan after an invasion
by the Soviet Union in 1979.


   People in the neighborhood who remember Alkifah Center say it
appeared to be a shoestring operation, although court papers
suggest that tens of thousands of dollars flowed through its bank
accounts in its heyday in the late 1980s and early 1990s.


   It was this ramshackle office that the government says evolved
into the American outpost of bin Laden's international terrorist
organization.


   The center was set up by Mustafa Shalabi, an Egyptian immigrant.
As his former neighbors recall him, Shalabi was infused with the
same religious fervor for the Afghan cause that galvanized many
young Muslims who regarded it as a holy war to liberate a Muslim
country from Communist domination.


   One of those who answered the call to fight in Afghanistan was
Mahmud Abouhalima, who was active in militant Islamic movements in
his native Egypt before moving to West Germany in 1981 and to New
York four years later.


   Abouhalima would later become a well-known figure in New York as
one of the men accused in the World Trade Center bombing. Shortly
after his arrest in that case, he met with government investigators
without his lawyer and provided a detailed account of Alkifah
Refugee Center and its internecine rivalries.


   He recounted his brief stint with the mujahedeen in Afghanistan
and told of traveling with a Palestinian man he knew as Mohammed
Odeh to Peshawar, in northern Pakistan, the staging area for the
Afghan rebels. Abouhalima said they had spent two and a half months
in separate training camps, learning how to use AK-47 assault
rifles and rocket-propelled grenade launchers.


   Later, they joined a militia unit and fought against Soviet
forces with the American-financed mujahedeen.


   For reasons that remain unclear, prosecutors rebuffed
Abouhalima's offer of cooperation. But his mention of Odeh is
intriguing in light of more recent events.


   A Palestinian man with a similar name and background, Mohammed
Saddiq Odeh, has been charged with driving the truck that delivered
the bomb in the attack on the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi. He has
pleaded not guilty and is awaiting trial in New York.


   Federal officials declined to say whether the Odeh charged in
the embassy attack this year is the same Palestinian whose name
surfaced five years ago.


   nn


   In his 1993 statement to investigators, Abouhalima made no
mention of bin Laden, although bin Laden is known to have worked in
Afghanistan and Pakistan during the war years distributing official
Saudi aid money for the mujahedeen.


   Not long after Abouhalima returned to New York in late 1988, the
Afghan war began to wind down. The Soviet Union withdrew the last
of its troops in 1989. Two years later, the United States agreed to
stop supplying arms to fractious Afghan warlords, and Afghanistan
descended into civil war.


   Many of the Arab men who had gone to fight, including bin Laden,
stayed on but turned their religious fury against secular Arab
governments and, ultimately, the U.S. military presence in the
Persian Gulf and in Africa.


   The turmoil in postwar Afghanistan echoed in Brooklyn, where
Shalabi kept Alkifah Center open. With the arrival in Brooklyn in
1990 of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the blind Egyptian cleric who was
later convicted of conspiring to blow up New York landmarks,
Abouhalima said, the regulars at Alkifah began to quarrel over
money, political direction and leadership.


   It was around that time that Abouhalima said he had first met el
Hage, a Lebanese-born naturalized American citizen, at an Islamic
conference in Oklahoma City.


   Just how close the two men became is not clear. Abouhalima's
lawyer in his World Trade Center trial, Hassen Ibn Abdellah, said,
``That case is over, and I know nothing of the government's
information or their sources.''


   But el Hage was familiar with several of the Arab immigrants
associated with Alkifah Center, say prosecutors and the account
that Abouhalima provided investigators.


   A federal prosecutor, Patrick Fitzgerald, said in court last
month, for example, that el Hage had a relationship with El Sayyid
A. Nosair, the Egyptian immigrant convicted on federal charges in
slaying of Kahane. He did not elaborate.


   Abouhalima, who told investigators that he had been in charge of
protecting Sheik Abdel Rahman during the cleric's stay in the
United States, told investigators that he had gone at least twice
to el Hage to buy guns. Abouhalima said he obtained a 9-millimeter
handgun from el Hage in 1990 for use by the cleric's bodyguards.


   Abouhalima also told investigators that he later gave el Hage
$4,000 to buy handguns and AK-47s to defend his associates from the
Jewish Defense League in New York, an organization founded by
Kahane. Abouhalima said el Hage had been unable to obtain the
weapons and returned most of the money.


   The timing of the transaction was not made clear.


   The government cited the weapons transaction in a court hearing
last month to persuade a federal magistrate to deny bail to el
Hage. Fitzgerald, the prosecutor, said el Hage had acknowledged
dealings with Abouhalima.


   ``The defendant has admitted that while in Texas he made efforts
to obtain firearms for Mahmud Abouhalima,'' Fitzgerald said. ``His
claim is that after purchasing the firearms, Mr. Abouhalima failed
to pick them up.''


   Abouhalima told investigators of other contacts with el Hage. He
said that el Hage called him from Texas in early 1991 and said
Shalabi wanted him to come to New York to help resolve a conflict
within Alkifah Center. At the time, Shalabi's leadership was under
fire from dissidents within his circle, including Abouhalima.


   El Hage did come to New York. A short time later, Shalabi was
found slain in his Brooklyn apartment. No one has been charged, and
the crime remains unsolved.


   Abouhalima said he and el Hage had met one more time in Al
Farooq Mosque on Atlantic Avenue, a few doors from Alkifah Center.
The topic of discussion, he said, was Shalabi's troubles and his
recent killing.


   Prosecutors say that by 1994, el Hage moved his wife and
children to Sudan, where neighbors said they knew him as the
director of Africa Help, a private aid organization. But the
government said he was the private secretary to bin Laden, who by
then had relocated from Afghanistan to Sudan.


   Later that year, the government said, el Hage moved to Kenya,
where he shared a house for a time with a man named Haroun Fazil
and helped bin Laden set up some of his front companies in Africa.
Fazil is accused of playing a role in the August embassy bombings
in Africa.


   The government appears to have been tracking el Hage for at
least a year before the embassy bombings. In September of last
year, he was pointedly questioned by federal agents investigating
bin Laden's group.


   El Hage, who moved back to the United States in 1997, has
pleaded not guilty to charges of conspiracy to kill Americans and
of lying to federal agents. In court his lawyer, Bruce McIntyre,
denied that his client had any connection to terrorist activities.
McIntyre could not be reached for further comment.


   These days, Arab immigrants still congregate along the little
strip of shops on Atlantic Avenue, where Arab food and novelties
are sold alongside Islamic books. A few thousand pray at Al Farooq
Mosque at the main Friday prayers, but it no longer has a
reputation as a hotbed of radical Islamic activity.


   Most of the men who were drawn to Alkifah Center in its
turbulent days have melted quietly back into their communities, say
people in the neighborhood familiar with the center's history.


   ``In 1994 this mosque finally settled down,'' said Abdulhakim
Ali Mohamed, the American-born religious scholar who became the
imam, or leader, of the mosque three years ago.


   No one is permitted to misuse the mosque to preach politics or
hate, he added. ``If there's anything to say,'' Mohamed said,
``I'll say it.''



   NAIROBI, Kenya _ Nine months before the attack on the American
Embassy here, U.S. intelligence officials received a detailed
warning that Islamic radicals were plotting to blow up the
building, according to Kenyan and American officials.


   The warning forecast the Aug. 7 bombing in several particulars,
the officials said. It came from an Egyptian man who American
officials now believe was involved in the simultaneous terrorist
assaults on the American Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.


   The Egyptian, Mustafa Mahmoud Said Ahmed, is now in jail in
Tanzania, charged by local prosecutors with bombing the embassy
there.


   Since the bombings, the State Department has maintained that it
received no specific warnings about threats to its embassies in
East Africa. But late on Thursday, a spokesman acknowledged that
the CIA had sent the State Department two reports about Ahmed that
prompted the embassy in Kenya to step up security for several
weeks.


   When no attack materialized, the embassy's precautions returned
to normal. No further steps were taken to improve the building's
physical security.


   Disclosure of the warning raises new questions about the State
Department's protection of the embassies in Kenya and Tanzania,
which did not meet the department's own minimum standards for
security. Until now, department officials have insisted that the
embassies faced only a minimal threat from terrorists.


   In the days after the bombings, the administration acknowledged
that it had spurned requests from the American ambassador in Kenya,
Prudence Bushnell, to move the entire embassy to a safer location.
The State Department would not say whether her cables mentioned
Ahmed's warning.


   According to American officials, Ahmed walked into the Nairobi
embassy last November and told American intelligence officials that
he knew of a group that was planning to detonate a bomb-laden truck
inside the diplomats' underground parking garage.


   In a separate interrogation by Kenyan intelligence officials,
which was relayed to the Americans, Ahmed said he had already taken
surveillance photos of the embassy for the attack, which was to
involve several vehicles and stun grenades, Kenyan officials said.


   Analysts at the CIA were unable to link Ahmed to any terrorist
group but they nonetheless sent two reports last November about his
statements to various government agencies.


   The reports, American officials said, included several caveats.
The CIA said that a foreign intelligence service that cooperates
with the agency believed that Ahmed was a fabricator of
information. In the reports, CIA analysts said that they could not
rule out the possibility that Ahmed's threats were serious. But
they said that the threats might also be a sophisticated ploy by
terrorists to observe and then counter the defenses the embassy
would take against a possible attack.


   After Ahmed appeared at the embassy, American officials alerted
their Kenyan counterpars, who questioned the Egytian and then
deported him. Soon after, Ahmed made his way to Tanzania where,
American officials now believe, he participated in the Aug. 7
bombing of the embassy that left 11 people dead.


   The embassy attack in Kenya unfolded that same day much as Ahmed
had said it would: A team of terrorists using two vehicles
attempted to drive an explosives-packed truck into the parking
garage. One of the attackers tossed stun grenades to frighten off
the locally hired security guards. When an exiting car blocked
their access to the garage, the attackers set off the bomb.


   A Clinton administration official acknowledged that the embassy
in Kenya had received a specific warning about an attack. ``It is
embarrassing,'' this official said, quickly adding: ``It is
tragic.'' Asked why the embassy took few steps to improve its
security after the warning, he said: ``That's the 64-million-dollar
question.''


   Other officials defended the government's handling of the case,
noting that American intelligence is deluged with warnings about
terrorist plots, most of which prove groundless.


   Thus far, Tanzanian authorities have not allowed Ahmed to be
interviewed, and it was unclear what motivated him to alert
authorities about a plot in which he appears to have played a role.
He told the Kenyans that in the past he had provided authorities
with information about Islamic radicals because he wanted to see
them arrested and rehabilitated rather than caught committing a
crime for which they would be executed.


   Ahmed has said he is innocent of the charges and his lawyer,
Abdul Mwengela, said his client's information about the bombings
stemmed solely from a conversation he had overheard the previous
year in a Nairobi hotel.


   A Tanzanian court refused to release Ahmed on bail this week and
ruled that FBI agents would be permitted to interrogate him.


   Tanzanian investigators suspect he was a central figure in the
plot. They are now examining whether Ahmed drove one of the
vehicles used in the Dar es Salaam bombing and whether the 400
pounds of explosives used in both blasts came into Tanzania in a
shipment of rice imported by one of his companies.


   The Clinton administration has not sought to extradite Ahmed
from Tanzania event though federal law permits the United States to
bring charges against anyone who attempts or conspires to murder
Americans anywhere in the world.


   American prosecutors have already brought to the United States
several other people accused of complicity in the bombings or of
having ties to Osama bin Laden, the Saudi exile who American
investigators have identified as the mastermind of the attacks.


   The American Embassy in Dar es Salaam declined to answer any
questions about Ahmed and why Washington was not seeking his
extradition. American diplomats in Tanzania, speaking on the
condition of anonymity, suggested the prosecution was being left to
the Tanzanians because there were no American victims. A White
House spokesman said the case was appropriately handled and that
the United States had no plans to extradite Mustafa because the
Tanzanians had expressed interest in trying him.


   Several non-American diplomats in the region speculated that the
United States is allowing the Tanzanians to try Ahmed because they
fear his trial in America might bring to light his dealings with
American authorities and other Western intelligence services.



