

   SAN FRANCISCO _ In a recent move that indicated he has no
intention of backing away from his company's aggressive business
tactics, Microsoft Corp.'s chairman, Bill Gates, has proposed
acquiring the software business behind 3Com Corp.'s popular Palm
Pilot hand-held computer, according to people who have been briefed
on the discussions.


   The offer, made in an August meeting with 3Com's chairman, Eric
Benhamou, was not accepted by 3Com executives, those people say.


   But certainly, Gates is said to have dangled an alluring
kingmaker's deal: If 3Com were willing to sell off its software
business, a market favorite compared with Microsoft's Windows CE
operating system, Gates would make the company's remaining Palm
Computing hardware business, ``the Compaq Computer of the hand-held
market.''


   Officials of both companies declined to confirm or deny word of
the meeting at Microsoft's Redmond, Wash., headquarters, at which
the two executives discussed a variety of strategic possibilities
between the two companies, according to several people privy to the
discussions.


   Though the proposal was unsuccessful, the approach provides
graphic insight into Microsoft's business tactics. As in its
abortive 1995 deal to acquire the financial software maker Intuit,
which was rejected not by Intuit but by the Justice Department,
Microsoft is increasingly looking to buy its way into markets where
its own products are not competitive enough to unseat established
brands.


   And the Palm Pilot offer would appear to indicate that Microsoft
has not scaled back its ambitions in the face of the Justice
Department's antitrust suit. The antitrust suit, initiated last
October, originally focused on Microsoft's linking of its Internet
Explorer World Wide Web browser with the industry-dominant Windows
95 operating system. But more recently, the Justice Department has
begun to examine a wide range of the company's business practices.


   Negotiations to control development and production of the
software that powers the most popular hand-held computer, the Palm
Pilot, are significant, analysts said, because hand-held devices,
from note-taking aids to cellular telephones, are one part of the
market where Microsoft does not appear to be quickly gaining
ground. The market is seen as growing more quickly than the
computer industry over all.


   ``Maybe Bill Gates was trying to get rid of a competitor,'' said
Andrew Seybold, a computer and communications analyst and publisher
of his own newsletter, based in Boulder Creek, Calif. ``I don't
think the Windows CE products have slowed them down at all.''


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   While Microsoft officials did not directly dispute word of the
overture to 3Com, they rebutted suggestions that they had lost
confidence in the Windows CE software.


   ``Any statement suggesting that Microsoft would license or buy
the Palm software in lieu of Windows CE is flatly false,'' said
Greg Shaw, a Microsoft spokesman.


   ``3Com is a great partner and we have frequent discussions with
them,'' he added. ``But it would be inappropriate to comment on
those discussions.''


   A spokeswoman for 3Com simply said the company would not comment
on any of the discussions the company had held with Microsoft.


   Though the two companies have had a broad set of partnerships in
other areas of computing, they have been bitter enemies in the
market for hand-held computers.


   Earlier this year, 3Com filed suit in Germany after Microsoft
introduced a clone of the Palm Pilot, which it called the Palm PC.
Microsoft backed down, renaming its hand-held unit the Palm-sized
PC.


   The Palm Computing business of 3Com has shipped more than 1.5
million copies of its hand-held device, making it the dominant
player in the market for so-called personal digital assistants
after earlier efforts like Apple Computer Inc.'s Newton failed to
gain broad acceptance.


   By comparison, only about 750,000 Windows CE-based hand-held
systems have been shipped, according to Rob Enderle, an analyst at
Giga Information Group in Santa Clara, Calif.



   WASHINGTON _ After months of noisy prelude, the antitrust trial
against the Microsoft Corp. opened in federal court Monday morning
with a pointed personal attack on Bill Gates, the company's
chairman, who testified in a taped deposition that he knew little
if anything about the key charges leveled against his company by
the Justice Department and 20 states.


   ``My only knowledge is the Wall Street Journal article; it
surprised me'' Gates said of reports of a meeting in which his
company had offered its chief competitor in Internet software a
chance to divide the market. Gazing directly at his questioner,
brow furrowed, head tilted slightly to the left, he added, ``I was
not involved'' in discussions of the key meetings.


   But as the Justice Department proceeded with its opening
argument over the next two hours, its lead lawyer in the case,
David Boies, presented more than a dozen memos and e-mail messages
written by Gates over the last three years, showing clearly that he
and other senior Microsoft executives not only knew about the
matters in question but had forcefully directed them.


   Using memos and documents, the government portrayed a company
obsessed with crushing its competitor, the Netscape Communications
Corp., and willing to use every tool at its disposal, including
threats and financial inducements, to force or persuade other
companies to drop any planned or existing alliances with Netscape.


   Gates told his questioner at another point in the deposition
that he had not even read the government's antitrust suit. As to
its central charge, illegal collusion to divide software markets,
Gates said only: ``I think somebody said that was in there.''


   Gates also said that in 1995, ``somebody came to me to ask if it
made sense investing in Netscape.'' Shaking his head dismissively,
Gates recalled, ``I said it didn't make any sense to me.''


   Moments later, Boies displayed on a 10-foot video screen and
enlargement of a memo in which Gates wrote to Paul Meritz, a senior
Microsoft executive, that over time Microsoft might have to compete
with Netscape. ``But in the meantime we can help them,'' Gates
wrote. ``We can pay them some money.''


   At the heart of this competition _ and central to the case _ are
browsing programs used to navigate the Internet's World Wide Web.
Netscape got an early lead in the market with its Navigator
browser. What frightened Microsoft was that Navigator could also be
used as a ``platform,'' a layer of software on which other programs
can run. This is the main function of an operating system, a market
in which Microsoft has a monopoly with its Windows family of
operating systems.


   Leaving the federal courthouse Monday afternoon, William H.
Neukom, Microsoft's senior vice president of law and government
affairs, said that the government's opening presentation was
``based entirely on loose and unreliable rhetoric and snippets that
were not in any reliable context.'' Microsoft will offer its own
opening remarks on Tuesday.


   ``These are the same tired old allegations,'' Neukomb said.
``None of these snippets, none of this rhetoric even approaches
proof of anti-competitive conduct.''


   Earlier, however, Boies had told the judge, ``It's competition
on the merits that the antitrust laws foster. But this is not a
situation of competition on the merits. This is a situation, I
respectfully submit, your honor, of clear restraint of trade.''


   In one 1995 e-mail message relating to Microsoft's effort to
push Netscape out of the market for browsers that run on Windows
computers, Gates wrote other Microsoft executives: ``I think there
is a very powerful deal we can make with Netscape. I would really
like to see something like this happen!!'' Other memos showed that
Gates was continually and personally involved.


   In an attempt to demonstrate a pattern of anticompetitive
behavior, Boies led Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson of U.S. District
Court through a chronology of memos and messages that seemed to
show Microsoft threatening and cajoling other companies.


   (STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   After a meeting with Gates in 1996, an executive with America
Online, the nation's largest on-line service, wrote to other
executives in his company: ``Gates delivered a characteristically
blunt query: `How much do we need to pay you to screw Netscape?
This is your lucky day.'''


   In the summer of 1995, one memo showed, Gates wrote to Andrew
Grove, chairman of the Intel Corp., and bluntly asked why the
company was doing software research that might conflict with
Micrsoft's plans.


   ``I don't understand why Intel funds a program that is against
Windows,'' the message said. An Intel note a few weeks later said,
``Gates made vague threats about supporting'' Intel's competitors,
unless Intel agreed to shut down its software research.


   Intel eventually relented, but while this standoff was underway,
a Microsoft memo said, the nation's computer-manufacturing industry
was paralyzed while awaiting word on whether Microsoft deemed it
acceptable to use certain features of a new computer chip Intel was
selling. Gates wrote: ``This is good news. It means they are
listening to us.''


   In another case, the memos indicated that Microsoft threatened
to stop selling the Apple Computer Co. a version of Microsoft's
Office software suite, which holds more than 90 percent of that
market _ unless Apple stopped supporting Netscape.


   A central argument in the government's suit is that Microsoft
has bundled its Web browser with Windows as a tactic in its war
with Netscape. For the last year, at least, Microsoft has argued
that the browser was added to Windows only for the benefit of
customers.


   In court Monday, however, the Justice Department displayed
numerous internal memos indicating that the bundling was indeed a
tactical decision. The memos showed that Microsoft's leaders first
wanted to sell Interent Explorer and expected to earn $120 million
a year from the sales. Then, when the plan to push Netscape out of
competition with Microsoft failed, the company's leaders decided to
bundle the browser with Windows instead as a means of helping it
gain a majority share of the market.


   In one memo, written in December 1995 _ in the thick of
Microsoft's effort to push Netscape out of the market _ Gates wrote
a memo to others in the company acknowledging that Netscape was
designing browser software ``far better than we are.''


   In an interview a few months later, displayed in court Monday,
Gates said: ``Our business model works even if the Internet
Explorer software is free. We are still selling operating systems.
What's Netscape's business model look like in that case? Not very
good.''


   The government also proffered several memos from computer
manufacturers complaining bitterly about Microsoft's licensing
restriction that prohibited them from offering Netscape if they
wanted to offer Windows.


   ``We're very disappointed,'' Hewlett Packard wrote to Microsoft
last year. ``This will cause significant, costly problems. From a
consumer perspective, it is hurting our industry.


   ``If we had another choice of another supplier, based on your
actions here, we would take it.''



   WASHINGTON _ The government's case against Microsoft is a
narrative that revolves around Netscape Communications Corp. and
the government's leading witness, James Barksdale, Netscape's
55-year-old president and chief executive.


   In his 127 pages of written testimony, released Monday
afternoon, Barksdale supplied new details and a firsthand
perspective of a disputed meeting between Microsoft and Netscape on
June 21, 1995, at Netscape's offices in Mountain View, Calif.


   At the meeting, the government contends, Microsoft executives
proposed that the two companies divvy up the emerging market for
software used to browse the Internet's World Wide Web. Microsoft
replies that the prosecutors are misinterpreting a routine business
meeting.


   A longtime executive who has worked for IBM, Federal Express and
AT&AMP;T, Barksdale described the June 1995 meeting as anything but
routine. ``I have never been in a meeting in my 35-year business
career in which a competitor had so blatantly implied that we would
either stop competing with it or the competitor would kill us,''
Barksdale stated. ``In all my years in business, I have never heard
nor experienced such an explicit proposal to divide markets.''


   If the court accepts Barksdale's version of the meeting, it will
represent a big victory for the Justice Department and the 20
states suing Microsoft. Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson could rule
that the meeting itself _ as a conspiracy to try to curb
competition through collusion _ is an antitrust violation.


   And the government's broader case begins with that meeting.
After Netscape spurned the offer, the government contends,
Microsoft embarked on a strategy intended to thwart competition in
the Internet software market by crushing Netscape, bundling its
browser into its Windows operating system and making restrictive
deals with personal-computer makers, online services and other
companies.


   Those tactics, the government says, represented an unfair use of
the market power Microsoft has as a result of its monopoly in
operating-system software for personal computers. Microsoft, the
government adds, used that power to protect its monopoly position
and to extend its reach into the fast-growing new markets for
Internet software and electronic commerce.


   The government focused on the June 1995 meeting in its antitrust
suit, filed in May, and since then additional information about the
meeting has been reported. But in his lengthy statement, Barksdale
provides, for the first time, a precise account of what he says
occurred at the meeting. He quotes what Microsoft executives said
and refers to notes taken by another Netscape executive who
attended the meeting, Marc Andreessen.


   The two companies had held talks for months about cooperating.
By the June meeting, Barksdale said, the cooperation Netscape most
sought was technical information from Microsoft that would enable
Netscape's Navigator browser to run smoothly on top of Microsoft's
industry-standard Windows operating system.


   At the meeting, Barksdale said, the Microsoft team, led by Dan
Rosen, proposed that Netscape not market a browser for the Windows
95 operating system, which was shipped two months later. As part of
the proposal, Microsoft would also invest in Netscape and take a
seat on the Netscape board.


   Barksdale asked if Netscape's ability to obtain technical
information from Microsoft was conditioned on Netscape's accepting
the proposal. Barksdale quotes Rosen as saying, ``It certainly
isn't independent.'' Any technical information Netscape was seeking
could be obtained, Barksdale quotes a Microsoft executive as
saying, ``depending on how we walk out of this room today.''


   If Netscape rejected Microsoft's deal, Barksdale testified, the
Microsoft team told Netscape that it could expect the technical
information to be delayed for three months _ meaning that the
latest version of Netscape's browser would not be ready for the
release of Windows 95.


   After declining Microsoft's offer, Netscape did not obtain the
necessary information until three months later, which Barksdale
says was ``precisely what Microsoft had threatened at the June 21
meeting.''


   These allegations concerning technical information are legally
significant because they portray Microsoft as using the power from
its operating-system dominance to reward allies and to punish
rivals _ something Microsoft has consistently maintained it does
not do.


   Andreessen, whose notes on his laptop computer are a vital piece
of the government's evidence, is said by Barksdale to be an
``extraordinarily fast typist'' _ an aside clearly intended to
deflect questions raised by Microsoft's lawyers about the
credibility of the notes.


   In his trial statement, Barksdale quoted these notes at length
including Microsoft's effort to keep Netscape out of the Windows 95
market for the browser _ or ``client'' in computer jargon. Typing
all capital letters for emphasis, Andreessen wrote that Microsoft
wanted to ``OWN THE WIN95 CLIENT MARKET AND THAT NETSCAPE SHOULD
STAY AWAY.''



   WASHINGTON _ Stinging from the government's opening statement, a
defiant Microsoft Corp. forcefully defended its chairman, Bill
Gates, in federal court on Tuesday, asserting that the
no-holds-barred tactics of his company are not only common in the
computer industry but also good for economy.


   Microsoft's opening salvo in the sweeping antitrust suit was
crafted as much for public opinion as for the court. The company
faces weeks of being portrayed as an alleged commercial predator in
a highly publicized trial, which could badly tarnish Microsoft's
reputation even if it wins.


   The government's case, which opened on Monday in the U.S.
District Court here, amounts to a litany of episodes of Microsoft's
having used its market power to bully and bend competitors,
business partners and corporate customers to its will.


   On Tuesday, Microsoft's legal team sought to frame these
episodes as part of rough-and-tumble capitalism. While the way
Microsoft does business may not be to everyone's liking, they
suggested, it is certainly not illegal.


   ``The antitrust laws are not a code of civility in business,''
said John Warden, Microsoft's lead lawyer.


   In his two-hour opening statement, Warden angrily accused the
government of trying to ``demonize Bill Gates,'' whom he described
as ``a man whose vision and innovation have been at the core of the
benefits that society is reaping from the information age.''


   The Justice Department and 20 states suing Microsoft, Warden
said, are misinterpreting routine business meetings in the computer
industry as anticompetitive conspiracies. The government's case
focuses largely on the Internet software market and the business
practices Microsoft used in its fight against the Netscape
Communications Corp., the early leader in the browser software used
to navigate the World Wide Web.


   A key charge in the suit, for example, is that Microsoft prodded
Netscape to illegally divide up the browser market in a June 1995
meeting _ a charge based mainly on the accounts of Netscape
executives.


   ``Netscape's account of this meeting was fantastical,'' Warden
said. ``None of the histrionics, shouting and table pounding
occurred. It's fantasy.''


   In Microsoft's view, the government's case is wrongheaded
because it does not understand the computer industry, especially
the necessity of cooperation among companies so that sophisticated
technology products work with each other. Just as the line between
one software product and another often blurs, the company argues,
so does the line between competition and cooperation; rivals in one
area routinely cooperate in another.


   Microsoft will attempt to cast doubt on several of the
government's allegations by characterizing meetings as efforts at
cooperation by companies that, understandably, do not always agree.


   The government, for example, has alleged that Microsoft tried to
pressure both the Intel Corp. and Apple Computer Inc. to back off
Internet software efforts than conflicted with Microsoft's plans _
and to support Microsoft in the browser war.


   ``Those proposals and threats claimed by the government,''
Warden said, ``will be shown by evidence to have been
garden-variety commercial discussions between companies developing
complementary products. They are of no antitrust consequence.''


   As the defendant, Microsoft does not have to prove that it
behaved innocently or even ethically. Instead, the role of
Microsoft's legal team is to cast considerable doubt on the
government's case _ both its specific allegations of bullying
tactics and its broad theme that the economy and consumers are
ultimately harmed by Microsoft's behavior.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS.)


   nn


   In the afternoon court session, the Microsoft defense moved to
the cross-examination of the government's lead-off witness, James
Barksdale, the president and chief executive of Netscape. To speed
up the trial, Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson has ordered that direct
testimony from witnesses for both sides must be submitted in
writing beforehand. So all the courtroom questioning of witnesses
begins with cross-examination.


   With Barksdale on the stand, Microsoft's legal tactics soon
became apparent. Warden, a detailed, methodical interrogator,
sought to portray Netscape as a Microsoft rival that went running
to the Justice Department as a business tactic.


   His questions also tried to lead Barksdale into admitting that
all software makers are constantly adding new features to their
products and that many companies have large shares of their markets
without being branded a monopolist _ central themes of Microsoft's
defense.


   A lean, craggy 55-year-old executive who speaks with the accent
of his native Louisiana, Barksdale proved an elusive and often
entertaining witness. Warden asked Barksdale about the early years
of his career when he worked as a salesman for the IBM Corp. from
1965 to 1972, years when IBM faced the kind of antitrust scrutiny
Microsoft faces today.


   Warden asked Barksdale if he believed the then-dominant IBM was
a monopolist. ``I don't know if I believed it,'' Barksdale replied,
``but we were trained to behave as if we were a monopoly because we
were operating under a consent decree,'' as Microsoft is today.


   Warden then asked Barksdale if he did not believe that the
dominant product of that day _ the IBM mainframe computer _ was not
a so-called bundled product of hardware and software that customers
had to buy together.


   The question relates to the current case because the government
alleges that Microsoft's Windows operating system and its Internet
Explorer browser are in fact two products bundled together for the
purpose of forcing customers who want its industry-standard
operating system to also take its browser. Microsoft says the
browser is a feature of its Windows operating system, and thus a
single product.


   To the mainframe question, Barksdale replied that IBM mainframe
hardware and software was sold as a bundle but that a 1968 consent
decree forced IBM to also sell them separately _ very similar to
the unbundling remedy that the government is seeking in the current
Microsoft case.


   ``That forced unbundling gave rise to a whole new industry of
hardware companies like Amdahl that made mainframe machines that
run IBM mainframe software,'' Barksdale said.


   To try to show that Netscape viewed a government suit as a
competitive tactic, Warden repeatedly questioned Barksdale about
his meetings with Justice Department officials including Joel
Klein, the assistant attorney general in charge of the antitrust
division.


   Warden produced a document for presentation at a Netscape
strategy meeting, titled the ``Project Rocket Launch Plan.'' At the
meeting, held early this year, one of four items under the heading
``The Situation'' was ``DOJ and court actions create opportunity
for Netscape.''


   Warden then asked Barksdale whether he viewed a Justice
Department suit as a ``key'' opportunity for his company. Not a key
one perhaps, Barksdale replied, but he did view a government
antitrust suit against Microsoft as ``a way of protecting an
opportunity to keep the playing field open for Internet software.''



   Demonstrating yet again the power of its franchise, the
Microsoft Corp. Tuesday reported that its quarterly earnings had
risen 58 percent over their level a year earlier, far exceeding
Wall Street estimates.


   Microsoft, the world's leading maker of computer software, said
demand for the Windows 98 operating system exceeded its
projections, particularly in Japan and Europe.


   Microsoft's improved performance coincided with the beginning
stages of a landmark antitrust trial in Washington that could
threaten its dominance in computer software.


   The company, which the Department of Justice has portrayed as a
ruthless and unfair competitor, said its strength in the latest
quarter was derived mostly from Windows 98, which was released just
last June, and the Windows NT corporate operating system.


   The results for Microsoft, which is based in Redmond, Wash.,
were released after the stock market had closed. In NASDAQ trading,
Microsoft shares closed at $100.25, down $2.69, which may have
reflected the opening of the antitrust trial on Monday. But in
after-hours trading, the shares traded as high as $103.75.


   ``Business is good, so the doom-and-gloom scenario of some
economic prognosticators certainly hasn't come to pass,'' Greg
Maffei, Microsoft's chief financial officer, said in a telephone
interview. ``This is not just for Microsoft, but the whole PC
industry.''


   Despite the widespread economic problems in much of the world,
Maffei noted, the six largest software companies and eight largest
computer and chip companies that have reported earnings have all
beaten estimates.


   While continuing to urge caution about the outlook, as Microsoft
executives do each quarter, Maffei said the company was likely to
do better than expected in the second fiscal quarter as well. He
said he would advise securities analysts to adjust their estimates
upward.


   For the quarter ended Sept. 30, Microsoft earned $1.68 billion,
or 62 cents a diluted share, more than twice the $663 million, or
25 cents a share, reported in the comparable period a year ago.
Revenues rose 26 percent, to $3.95 billion from $3.13 billion.


   The latest results included a $160 million one-time gain on the
sale of Softimage, while in the comparable quarter last year the
company took a previously announced $296 million write-off related
to the purchase of WebTV Networks Inc. Without these one-time
items, Microsoft's earnings rose to $1.52 billion, or 56 cents a
share, compared to the previous year's $959 million, or 36 cents a
share, to record the 58 percent gain.


   Analysts surveyed by First Call Corp., which tracks earnings
results, had expected Microsoft to earn 49 cents a share.


   ``It was a terrific quarter, a real blowout, a very pleasant
surprise for Microsoft shareholders,'' said Rick Sherlund, an
analyst with Goldman Sachs. Microsoft's results ``benefited from
much higher margins,'' he said. ``We had a combination of better
than expected revenues and lower than expected expenses in the
quarter,'' he said.


   Maffei said the improved profit margins were partly a seasonal
phenomenon because the company does less hiring during the summer
and the marketing costs associated with the launch of Windows 98
were largely in the third and fourth quarters of fiscal 1998.


   Also, service costs are lower for Windows 98 than for Windows
95. ``We had better than expected revenues, and we were at the low
end of our spending,'' he said.


   Although the antitrust suit brought against Microsoft by the
United States Department of Justice did not affect earnings, Maffei
said, it does have a direct cost in increased legal spending.


   ``That's a large cost, but not a material cost,'' he said. ``We
do worry about the continued cost of the DOJ's image blasting.''


   Unearned revenue, the portion of sales Microsoft sets aside to
reflect the long-term deployment of many of its products, grew to
$3.13 billion in the quarter, up $245 million from a year ago. Cash
and short-term investments totaled $17.24 billion, compared with
$13.93 billion a year ago.


   On a cautionary note, Maffei said fallout from the Asian
economic crisis remains a concern and the company is uncertain
about future performance in Latin American countries. Corporate
spending for computer issues related to the year 2000 may divert
revenues away from some Microsoft products but could benefit
others, he said.



   SAN FRANCISCO _ In a recent move that indicated he has no
intention of backing away from his company's aggressive business
tactics, Microsoft Corp.'s chairman, Bill Gates, has proposed
acquiring the software business behind 3Com Corp.'s popular Palm
Pilot hand-held computer, according to people who have been briefed
on the discussions.


   The offer, made in an August meeting with 3Com's chairman, Eric
Benhamou, was not accepted by 3Com executives, those people say.


   But certainly, Gates is said to have dangled an alluring
kingmaker's deal: If 3Com were willing to sell off its software
business, a market favorite compared with Microsoft's Windows CE
operating system, Gates would make the company's remaining Palm
Computing hardware business, ``the Compaq Computer of the hand-held
market.''


   Officials of both companies declined to confirm or deny word of
the meeting at Microsoft's Redmond, Wash., headquarters, at which
the two executives discussed a variety of strategic possibilities
between the two companies, according to several people privy to the
discussions.


   Though the proposal was unsuccessful, the approach provides
graphic insight into Microsoft's business tactics. As in its
abortive 1995 deal to acquire the financial software maker Intuit,
which was rejected not by Intuit but by the Justice Department,
Microsoft is increasingly looking to buy its way into markets where
its own products are not competitive enough to unseat established
brands.


   And the Palm Pilot offer would appear to indicate that Microsoft
has not scaled back its ambitions in the face of the Justice
Department's antitrust suit. The antitrust suit, initiated last
October, originally focused on Microsoft's linking of its Internet
Explorer World Wide Web browser with the industry-dominant Windows
95 operating system. But more recently, the Justice Department has
begun to examine a wide range of the company's business practices.


   Negotiations to control development and production of the
software that powers the most popular hand-held computer, the Palm
Pilot, are significant, analysts said, because hand-held devices,
from note-taking aids to cellular telephones, are one part of the
market where Microsoft does not appear to be quickly gaining
ground. The market is seen as growing more quickly than the
computer industry over all.


   ``Maybe Bill Gates was trying to get rid of a competitor,'' said
Andrew Seybold, a computer and communications analyst and publisher
of his own newsletter, based in Boulder Creek, Calif. ``I don't
think the Windows CE products have slowed them down at all.''


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   While Microsoft officials did not directly dispute word of the
overture to 3Com, they rebutted suggestions that they had lost
confidence in the Windows CE software.


   ``Any statement suggesting that Microsoft would license or buy
the Palm software in lieu of Windows CE is flatly false,'' said
Greg Shaw, a Microsoft spokesman.


   ``3Com is a great partner and we have frequent discussions with
them,'' he added. ``But it would be inappropriate to comment on
those discussions.''


   A spokeswoman for 3Com simply said the company would not comment
on any of the discussions the company had held with Microsoft.


   Though the two companies have had a broad set of partnerships in
other areas of computing, they have been bitter enemies in the
market for hand-held computers.


   Earlier this year, 3Com filed suit in Germany after Microsoft
introduced a clone of the Palm Pilot, which it called the Palm PC.
Microsoft backed down, renaming its hand-held unit the Palm-sized
PC.


   The Palm Computing business of 3Com has shipped more than 1.5
million copies of its hand-held device, making it the dominant
player in the market for so-called personal digital assistants
after earlier efforts like Apple Computer Inc.'s Newton failed to
gain broad acceptance.


   By comparison, only about 750,000 Windows CE-based hand-held
systems have been shipped, according to Rob Enderle, an analyst at
Giga Information Group in Santa Clara, Calif.


   &QL; 
NYT-10-18-98 1807EDT &QL;



   Following is the text of the first two sections of the Sherman
Act, as passed by Congress in 1890. As the foundation on which
federal antitrust law has been built, the act has been amended
several times _ elevating the crime to a felony, increasing the
fines and prison terms for individuals and setting fines for
corporations convicted of violating it. In the case of Microsoft,
the government has invoked the Sherman Act to file a civil suit
that seeks to change the company's business practices, not a
criminal suit that seeks financial penalties.


   An Act to Protect Trade And Commerce Against Unlawful Restraints
and Monopolies:


   Section 1. Every contract, combination in the form of trust or
otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce among
the several States, or with foreign nations, is hereby declared to
be illegal. Every person who shall make any such contract or engage
in any such combination or conspiracy, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by fine
not exceeding five thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not
exceeding one year, or by both said punishments, in the discretion
of the court.


   Section 2. Every person who shall monopolize, or attempt to
monopolize, or combine or conspire with any other person or
persons, to monopolize any part of the trade of commerce among the
several States, or with foreign nations, shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor, and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by
fine not exceeding five thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not
exceeding one year, or by both said punishments, in the discretion
of the court.


   &QL; 
NYT-10-18-98 1742EDT &QL;



   WASHINGTON _ Attempting to refute a central allegation in the
government's antitrust case, Microsoft Corp. on Wednesday produced
a secret e-mail message from the chairman of Netscape
Communications Corp. seeking Microsoft's cooperation, offering to
stay out of its way and suggesting that Microsoft invest in
Netscape.


   The e-mail, written on Dec. 29, 1994, was introduced to suggest
that it was Netscape, not Microsoft, that initiated some of the
elements of what the government portrays as an illegal offer by
Microsoft in June 1995 to divide with Netscape the market for
software used to browse the Internet's World Wide Web.


   The e-mail message, written by James Clark, the chairman and
cofounder of Netscape, was submitted in court Wednesday by
Microsoft as part of its defense in the sweeping antitrust suit
filed by the Justice Department and 20 states. It was perhaps the
most surprising piece of evidence produced during a second day of
often combative cross-examination of the government's leading
witness, James Barksdale, the president and chief executive of
Netscape.


   Throughout the morning and afternoon sessions, John Warden,
Microsoft's lead lawyer, frequently tried to goad Barksdale to
concede key points in Microsoft's defense _ namely, that Netscape's
browser is widely distributed despite Microsoft's allegedly unfair
business practices, and that Microsoft's Internet Explorer browser
only began gaining market share against Netscape's Navigator in the
fall of 1996, because Explorer had been significantly improved, not
because of predatory conduct on the part of Microsoft.


   Barksdale made few concessions, repeatedly replying, ``No, I
don't agree.''


   In the e-mail memo to Dan Rosen, a Microsoft executive, Clark
wrote ``We have never planned to compete with you.''


   Later, Clark wrote, ``We want to make this company a success,
but not at Microsoft's expense. We'd like to work with you. Working
together could be in your self-interest as well as ours. Depending
on the interest level, you might take an equity position in
Netscape, with the ability to expand the position later.''


   Clark concluded his e-mail appeal by noting, ``No one in my
organization knows about this message.''


   Barksdale said he did not know about the e-mail until recently
and that the first time he saw it was in court Wednesday. He said
that Clark told him about his December 1994 proposal to Microsoft
this summer when Netscape executives were being deposed by
Microsoft's legal team in preparation for the trial.


   ``He said that he made an offer to them including some of this
and that it was rejected,'' Barksdale testified.


   On the witness stand Wednesday, Barksdale sought to portray the
December 1994 e-mail from Clark as a freelance overture that did
not represent corporate policy. ``He never discussed it with the
board, and he never discussed it with me,'' Barksdale said.


   Because Clark's offer was quickly dismissed by Microsoft, the
government asserts that its introduction in court by Microsoft is
mainly an effort by the defense to try to ``change the facts and
change the subject,'' in the words of David Boies, special trial
counsel for the Justice Department.


   The December 1994 e-mail is not related, the government
contends, to the June 1995 meeting in which the Justice Department
says that Microsoft made its illegal offer. According to the
government, Microsoft offered to make an investment in Netscape and
give Netscape's software developers crucial technical information
about the Windows operating system if Netscape would agree not to
make a browser for Windows 95 operating system, which Microsoft
released two months later.


   The government says Netscape rejected Microsoft's collusion
pact, while Microsoft replies that the government is
misrepresenting what was a routine business meeting.


   Clark sent his e-mail during Netscape's precarious startup
phase, before the company had yet begun to garner a lot of sales
and with Clark watching his $5 million investment in the company
dwindle. In his testimony, Barksdale tried to dismiss the memo as a
sales ploy, perhaps made in desperation, as opposed to a genuine
business plan for Netscape.


   Warden asked Barksdale of Clark, ``Do you regard him as a
truthful man?''


   After pausing, Barksdale replied, ``I regard him as a
salesman.''


   ``I'm not going to touch that,'' Warden responded.


   Microsoft also introduced a portion of Clark's pretrial
deposition to try to prove that as early as the fall of 1994
Netscape was aware of Microsoft's intention to bundle its browser
with its Windows operating system.


   This is potentially significant because the government says that
Microsoft's principal reason for folding the browser into the
operating system was as an anticompetitive tactic to undermine
Netscape. In the fall of 1994, Microsoft asserts, Netscape had not
yet produced its first product.


   In his deposition, Clark testified that he first heard Bill
Gates, the chairman of Microsoft, talk of bundling the browser and
the operating system at an industry conference in October 1994.


   Clark was asked if he had a personal conversation with Gates
about this, and Clark said no, instead recalling it as a vaguely
threatening comment made to the conference audience.


   ``All he said was: I hope no one plans to make money on browsers
because they will be bundled into the operating system,'' Clark
said.


   In his cross-examination, Warden also tried to establish that
Netscape had long viewed all-but-free distribution of its browser
as part of its business plan. This assertion relates to the case
because Microsoft's decision to distribute its Internet Explorer
browser free is characterized in the government's suit as one of
several extraordinarily aggressive steps Microsoft took to try to
undercut Netscape.


   To make this point, Warden introduced as evidence portions of
the manuscript from a new book, ``Competing on Internet Time:
Lessons from Netscape and Its Battle with Microsoft,'' by Michael
Cusumano, a professor at Massachusetts Institute of Technology's
Sloan School of Management, and David Yoffie, a professor at the
Harvard business school.


   The book, based on extensive interviews with present and former
Netscape executives, quotes Marc Andreessen, a cofounder and
executive vice president, as describing browser marketing as ``free
but not free.''


   The concept refers to the notion that many individuals and
corporations downloaded browser software from Netscape's Web site
without paying for it. Still, free distribution is valuable because
it encourages companies to adopt Netscape's technology, and
Netscape bases its business on selling large software packages for
hub computers, or servers, that feed data to many personal
computers in a network.


   Warden raised the issue to suggest that Netscape's business
model did not vary much from what Microsoft did.


   When asked about it, Barksdale replied, ``I have never heard
this term `free but not free.' I have not heard it, I don't espouse
that, and that was not our strategy.''



   WASHINGTON _ A lawyer for Microsoft Corp. on Thursday portrayed
the company's competitor in the Internet software business,
Netscape Communications Corp., as a willing and eager participant
in deal-making that culminated in a June 1995 meeting at which the
government and Netscape now say that Microsoft illegally offered to
divide the market.


   That meeting and the charge of an illegal offer to divide the
market for Internet browsers, the software used to navigate the
World Wide Web, are central elements of the antitrust suit by the
Justice Department and 20 states being heard in United States
district court here.


   Late in the day, the Justice Department made public an e-mail
that seemed to support elements of the government's account.


   The memo, from Dan Rosen, a senior Microsoft executive who
attended the meeting with Netscape's leaders, was written to Bill
Gates, Microsoft's chairman, and others. It summarizes the meeting
and begins with a list of ``Our goals going into the meeting, in
priority order.''


   The first goal, the memo said, was to ``establish Microsoft
ownership'' of the market for Web browsers that run on Windows
computers.


   In his third day cross-examining James L. Barksdale, Netscape's
president and chief executive, the Microsoft lawyer, John Warden,
suggested that the market-division allegation stemmed from anger on
the part of Netscape executives when they learned at that meeting
that Microsoft intended to bundle its own browser with its Windows
operating system.


   ``Is there really anything going on here other than a difference
of opinion between you and Microsoft on where the line is'' between
a browser and an operating system? Warden asked.


   At that Barksdale _ normally a calm and unerringly polite
witness _ exploded: ``We feel strongly that a browser is a separate
application, and a manufacturer that controls 90 percent, plus, of
the world's operating systems and pulls the browser into it has
stepped across that line!''


   ``That's your objection?'' Warden asked. ``You disagree with
them building it into the operating system?''


   ``I do, I do, I do,'' Barksdale said.


   Among other charges, the government's suit accuses Microsoft of
trying to persuade Netscape executives, at the meeting on June 21,
1995, to quit marketing browsers that run on Windows computers. If
they did not agree, the government says, Microsoft threatened to
destroy Netscape. Such a collusion to divide markets would be a
violation of federal antitrust law.


   When Netscape refused, the government further charges, Microsoft
decided to bundle its own Web browser, Internet Explorer, with the
Windows system to drive Netscape out of the browser business.
Windows runs more than 90 percent of all new personal computers.


   In court Thursday, Microsoft presented memos and e-mail messages
suggesting that Netscape had eagerly sought the June meeting.
Barksdale acknowledged that he had written memos to other Netscape
executives in early June 1995 in which he had enthusiastically
reported that in an earlier meeting, Microsoft had shown an
interest in investing in his company.


   ``No, they didn't do anything as rash as trying to buy us (yet)
but they did suggest that they wanted to invest in us,'' Barksdale
wrote to another employee three weeks before the meeting. ``It was
a good session.''


   Another memo from Barksdale to several senior Netscape employees
reported that Microsoft had been ``very friendly, nonthreatening''
and had congratulated Netscape on having ``done a great job.''


   As Barksdale's e-mail recounted it, the Microsoft executives had
added, ``How can we work together? Discussion done with Bill's
blessing,'' a reference to Gates.


   With that as a prelude, Warden, Microsoft's lead counsel in the
case, produced several other e-mail messages and memos suggesting
that Netscape and Microsoft had both plunged into planning for the
June 21 meeting.


   Warden used each to cast further doubt on the government's
allegations. One piece of documentary evidence indicating that
Microsoft did propose dividing the browser market are notes that
Marc Andreessen, a cofounder and executive vice president of
Netscape, took on his laptop computer during the meeting.


   A copy of those notes was released Thursday by the court.


   Andreessen wrote that Microsoft had issued a ``threat that
Microsoft will own the Windows 95 client market, and that Netscape
should stay away.''


   Another piece of evidence is the memo from Rosen to Gates,
written the day after the meeting. Rosen quotes another member of
the Micrsoft team as telling the Netscape executives: ``We need to
understand if you will adopt our platform,'' Windows, ``and build
on top if it, or if you are going to compete with us.''


   The memo continued, ``They understand that we are going to
incorporate into the platform technology that they provide today.''
The Microsoft executives, according to Rosen's memo, told
Netscape's leaders that their intention was to ``suck most of the
functionality of the current Netscape browser'' into Windows.


   But Rosen's memo did not indicate that the Netscape executives
had reacted negatively to this.


   The memo was introduced into evidence Thursday, but not referred
to in court.


   In fact, summing up his conclusions after three days of
testimony, Warden said, ``I suggest to you, Barksdale, that if you
look at the whole record of events leading up to June 21, the only
fair conclusion that can be reached is that Andreessen imagined or
invented the proposal to divide the markets, and that you and your
company signed onto it in order to assist in this prosecution.''


   ``I absolutely disagree with that,'' Barksdale retorted. ``It's
absurd. I was in the meeting. I know what I know.


   ``I was there,'' he said. ``You weren't.''



   WASHINGTON _ The New Economy is on trial here along with
Microsoft Corp.


   Sure, the company is the one in the dock. But the outcome of the
case against Microsoft will establish the ground rules for how the
doctrine of antitrust will apply to high-technology fields like
computer software. And the software industry is seen as being at
the forefront of new patterns of behavior by workers, companies and
markets that define the New Economy.


   In the New Economy, people live on Internet time and product
cycles are measured in months, not years. It is the slice of the
economy driven by entrepreneurs, stock options and network effects.
Silicon Valley is its headquarters, with subsidiaries in Seattle,
Austin and elsewhere. It is the future, its proponents insist,
coming to your home soon.


   If Microsoft wins, the digital age will unfold as a free-fire
zone of let-'er-rip capitalism, for better or worse. If Microsoft
loses, courts or the antitrust watchdogs may be getting their oars
into such complex matters as product design, for better or worse.


   Let the courts decide. But for an analytic examination of
struggle and competition at the edge of the New Economy today, a
new book, ``Competing on Internet Time: Lessons from Netscape and
Its Battle with Microsoft'' (The Free Press), offers some
intriguing insights. The book, written by Michael A. Cusumano, a
professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Sloan
School of Management, and David B. Yoffie, a professor at the
Harvard Business School, was placed in evidence at the Microsoft
trial last week.


   In its defense, Microsoft points to passages in the book in
which executives of Netscape Communications are quoted speaking
candidly about their missteps. Microsoft calls these statements
proof that Netscape's travails in the Internet browser market were
its own doing, not because Microsoft was acting like a nasty
monopolist.


   Yet the book as a whole reads as a coming-of-age account of the
triumphs and setbacks of a fast-moving Internet pioneer daring or
foolish enough to take on the dominant company in computing.
Netscape's experience teaches as much about what hasn't changed as
what has.


   A fundamental lesson is that even revolutionary technologies
take time to cause a revolution. No matter how great the tail wind
of hype and venture capital, the Next Big Thing takes time to
change the practices and habits of companies and people. ``Netscape
got too ambitious and too wedded to the belief that the Internet
revolution would change everything tomorrow,'' Yoffie explained.


   The threat Netscape posed to Microsoft was that its browser
could serve as an alternative ``platform'' to Microsoft's Windows.
In other words, the browser could take the place of Windows as the
first thing users see when they start their computers and as the
departure point from which applications could be started.


   But it takes a long time for a new computing platform to catch
hold, as thousands of software programmers gradually become
converts and write applications that work with the new platform. By
often and publicly declaring that it was going to challenge
Microsoft head-on, Netscape aroused the software giant, which
trailed in Internet software. ``Netscape had the perfect Trojan
horse,'' Yoffie said. ``But it woke up the enemy before it was
entrenched.''


   As it matured, Netscape also found that while the speed of
product development was important, so was traditional product
quality. Netscape's freewheeling ``hacker culture'' fostered
flexibility and creativity _ one Netscape manager quoted in the
book described its development style as ``slightly out of control''
_ but also led to buggy software, a nuisance that became
problematic with more sales to quality-conscious corporations.


   In the last year or so, the authors note, Netscape has made
strides in quality, hiring testers and increasing its use of
automated testing software. Netscape has increased its ratio of
testers to developers from one-to-five to one-to-three, though it
still trails Microsoft's one-to-one ratio. ``You can be fast and
flexible in software development, but you have to pay the price in
testing,'' Cusumano said.


   Netscape's future is by no means assured. But for all the talk
at the trial about Microsoft trying to crush it, Netscape has done
a good job of changing its strategy to avoid tackling Microsoft
head-on whenever possible.


   What Netscape, the Internet pioneer, has learned _ setting aside
the legal issues _ is precisely what the pioneers of the
personal-computer revolution learned. They declared that their
technology would change the world, but the process works in the
other direction, too. For a breakthrough technology to move into
the mainstream, it must become more mainstream _ easier, more
reliable and more useful for the workaday chores of the economy. It
does not change everything overnight.

