
	   MANILA, Philippines (AP) _ President Joseph Estrada on Saturday
urged militant unionists at Philippine Airlines to accept a vote by
workers approving a 10-year no-strike deal to revive the debt-laden
airline.
	   On Friday, about 61 percent of the members of PAL's largest
union accepted the proposal to suspend collective bargaining in
exchange for 20 percent of the company's stock and seats on its
board.
	   Hardline union members say they will file charges questioning
the legality of agreement, but Estrada urged them to accept the
referendum results.
	   ``It's very clear that majority have agreed to it and voted
freely,'' said Estrada during his weekly radio program. ``Everybody
has to sacrifice. Labor and management should cooperate at this
time of crisis.''
	   Following the outcome of the referendum, PAL said it can resume
flights to 14 domestic destinations next Wednesday and to nine
international destinations within several weeks.
	   It was the second time that the 6,700 members of PAL's largest
union have voted on the rescue plan. Last week, they rejected the
proposal, forcing the airline to shut down and leaving much of the
country without air service.
	   Estrada assured workers that he will defend their rights during
the 10-year CBA suspension. The Philippine president also assured
the International Labor Organization the proposed suspension is
only a temporary measure and would help the government cope with
the Asian crisis.
	   ``It is not true that I am anti-labor,'' he said. ``This is only
a temporary and will not deny workers' rights.''
	   The union had been sharply split over the proposal, with
militant members saying a suspension of the bargaining agreement
would violate workers' rights.
	   Many union members had believed the government would not allow
the 57-year-old flag carrier to close. But when government-enlisted
foreign carriers began flying some domestic routes on Monday, union
leaders reversed their position and agreed to accept the management
plan.
	   The agreement must be formally endorsed by workers, regulators
and PAL's creditors.
	   Management said at least 2,000 workers will be recalled to
handle domestic operations, and most of the airline's 8,600 current
workers will be recalled once international flights are fully
operational.
	   Asia's currency crisis hit shortly after PAL launched a dlrs 4
billion modernization program, greatly inflating the amount of
money it must repay to overseas creditors. It has been unable to
make payments on dlrs 2.1 billion of debt.

	   MANILA, Philippines (AP) _ President Joseph Estrada said
Saturday the financially troubled Philippine Airlines will resume
its international flights on Sunday by flying him to Singapore
where he will address the World Economic Forum.
	   Debt-laden PAL reopened Wednesday with domestic flights after a
13-day shutdown caused by disagreements with its largest labor
union over a management recovery plan.
	   Speaking over his weekly radio program, Estrada also said Cathay
Pacific and Northwest Airlines were interested in investing in the
national carrier.
	   ``It's either of the two,'' he said.
	   Earlier this week, Peter Foster, a regional manager of Cathay,
said the company would soon decide whether to invest in PAL.
	   Foster said Cathay is ``taking a very close look'' at PAL but
declined to comment what they have found or what stake they are
considering.
	   PAL officials say Singapore Airlines is also interested in a
possible investment.
	   PAL, which has been unable to make payments on dlrs 2.1 billion
in debt, was devastated by a pilots' strike in June and by the
region's currency crisis, which reduced passenger numbers and
inflated costs.
	   Estrada brokered an agreement between PAL majority owner and
chairman, Lucio Tan, and its largest union that led to the
reopening of the 57-year-old airline.
	   Under the accord, workers will suspend their collective
bargaining agreement for 10 years in exchange for 20 percent
ownership of the airline.
	   Leftist labor leaders say the agreement violates workers' rights
and called Estrada anti-union.
	   The visit to Singapore would be Estrada's first foreign trip as
president.
	   He will deliver the keynote address to the 7th East Asia
Economic Summit sponsored by the World Economic Forum on Tuesday.
	   Estrada will also hold talks with Singapore Prime Minister Goh
Chok Tong, Singaporean business leaders and members of the Filipino
community.
	   Estrada said he is scheduled to hold a ``getting-to-know-you''
meeting with Indonesian President B. J. Habibie on Tuesday on
Indonesia's Batam Island south of Singapore.
	   Presidential spokesman Jerry Barican said the discussions
between the two leaders may include immigration and refugee
problems near the two countries' common borders, as well as fishing
and rights to other natural resources in the area. 	   

	   MANILA, Philippines (AP) _ The Philippine government is ready to
give up its stake in ailing Philippine Airlines and will not infuse
any additional capital if a new investor, possibly Cathay Pacific
Airways, comes in, officials said Tuesday.
	   ``Our objective is full privatization. The government's policy
is to be out of the company that is being privatized,'' Finance
Secretary Edgardo Espiritu said.
	   The government owns 14 percent of PAL, mostly held by public
financial institutions, pension funds and the defense forces.
	   PAL is negotiating with Cathay Pacific, which could buy up to 40
percent of the airline under Philippine law.
	   Cathay Pacific has said it wants management control of the
Philippine flag carrier, which has been mired in debt and labor
unrest. A PAL official has said it is willing to give Cathay
Pacific management control.
	   Several Manila newspapers reported Tuesday that Cathay Pacific
also is demanding that the government divest its shareholdings in
PAL before it will agree to conclude a deal with the airline.
	   PAL executive vice president Manolo Aquino said there was no
such demand, adding that the government's shares in PAL will
naturally be diluted once a deal is forged and Cathay Pacific puts
in new capital.
	   President Joseph Estrada said he would agree to any setup in PAL
as long as it remains the country's flag carrier.
	   ``As long as PAL continues and as long as it remains the flag
carrier of the country, so be it,'' he said.
	   PAL, Asia's oldest airline, has been unable to make payments on
dlrs 2.1 billion in debt after being devastated by a pilots' strike
and by Asia's currency crisis.
	   PAL shut down its operations on Sept. 23 after the ground crew
union turned down a management-proposed recovery plan that included
a 10-year suspension of labor's collective bargaining agreement in
exchange for 20 percent ownership of the airline.
	   Workers agreed to accept the plan nearly two weeks after the
shutdown, and the airline resumed domestic flights Oct. 7 and
international flights to the United States on Oct. 26.
	   PAL is to resume flights to Hong Kong and Tokyo on Wednesday. It
plans to restart flights to Singapore, Taipei, Fukuoka and Osaka in
the next few weeks.	   

	   MANILA, Philippines (AP) _ The number of labor strikes and
lockouts in the Philippines has declined this year despite business
difficulties caused by Asia's financial crisis, the labor
department said Sunday.
	   The department said 712 strikes and lockouts have occurred so
far, a drop of 14 percent compared to 827 in the same period last
year. The number of workers who joined the strikes also declined by
20 percent from more than 210,000 to 175,500.
	   Early mediation by labor officials contributed to an easing of
labor unrest in the country, the department said in a statement.
	   The country, however, suffered one of its worst labor problems
when flag carrier Philippine Airlines was forced to shut down Sept.
23 due to disputes with its largest labor union and mounting debts
and losses, partly caused by the regional financial turmoil.
	   PAL laid off more than 3,000 employees at the height of its
labor and financial troubles this year, the biggest single
retrenchment in the Philippines.
	   PAL resumed domestic flights Oct. 7 and started restoring
international flights last month after settling its labor problems.
It has since accepted an investment offer from Hong Kong's Cathay
Pacific and the two airlines are drawing up a plan to rehabilitate
the Philippine carrier.	   

	   MANILA, Philippines (AP) _ Prospective investor Cathay Pacific
Airways wants the number of employees at troubled Philippine
Airlines to be slashed from more than 8,000 to 5,000 but PAL has
not yet agreed, Finance Secretary Edgardo Espiritu said Monday.
	   PAL officials have accepted an investment offer from the Hong
Kong-based carrier and the two companies are drawing up a
comprehensive plan to rehabilitate PAL.
	   PAL's chairman and chief stockholder, Lucio Tan, wants to retain
about 8,000 employees to avoid antagonizing the airline's labor
unions, Espiritu said.
	   ``That is the point of disagreement now because Cathay wants a
larger retrenchment,'' Espiritu told reporters.
	   Cathay Pacific officials were not immediately available for
comment.
	   Espiritu said Cathay Pacific may invest as much as dlrs 100
million in PAL but other foreign investors, including the
International Finance Corp., the World Bank's investment arm, are
interested in investing part of that amount.
	   PAL closed for nearly two weeks on Sept. 23 after failing to
persuade its largest union to accept a management-proposed recovery
plan under which its collective bargaining agreement would be
suspended for 10 years in exchange for a 20 percent share of the
company's stock.
	   The union later decided to accept the plan, allowing PAL to
resume domestic flights on Oct. 7 and international flights later.
As part of the plan, the union agreed to allow an unspecified
number of workers to be retrenched as long as the laid-off workers
get separation benefits agreed by both sides.
	   In June, PAL was embroiled in a crippling three-week pilots'
strike that brought the company close to financial ruin. At the
height of the strike, PAL laid off 5,000 of its 13,000 workers to
minimize its losses.
	   PAL says it is unable to make payments on dlrs 2.1 billion of
debt due to mounting losses worsened by its labor problems and
Asia's currency crisis.	   

	   MANILA, Philippines (AP) _ Ailing Philippine Airlines and
prospective investor Cathay Pacific Airways have clashed over the
laying off of PAL workers, prompting PAL to revive talks with
another foreign airline, an official said Tuesday.
	   PAL earlier accepted a preliminary investment offer from Cathay
Pacific, and the companies announced Nov. 10 that they would draw
up a comprehensive plan to rehabilitate the Philippine flag
carrier.
	   President Joseph Estrada's executive secretary, Ronaldo Zamora,
said the two airlines have disagreed on how many of PAL's more than
8,000 workers should be laid off to make the airline viable.
	   Finance Secretary Edgardo Espiritu said that Hong Kong-based
Cathay Pacific wants to trim PAL's work force to about 5,000, but
PAL chairman and chief stockholder Lucio Tan did not want to cut
the number of workers below 8,000 to avoid antagonizing the
company's unions.
	   Cathay Pacific also wants to lay off about 200 PAL pilots, a
proposal also opposed by Tan, Zamora said. Tan wants to retain the
200 pilots because they stood by him when the majority of PAL's
pilots staged a devastating strike in June.
	   Tan has gone to the United States to try to revive talks with
Northwest Airlines, which earlier expressed interest in investing
in PAL, Zamora said.
	   Zamora said Northwest was larger than Cathay Pacific ``and maybe
its first action would not be to fire employees.''
	   PAL spokesman Rolando Estabillo did not comment on the reported
disagreement but said negotiations between the two companies were
continuing. He said Cathay Pacific was still studying PAL's
financial records.
	   Katherine Wang, a spokeswoman for Cathay Pacific in Hong Kong,
said it has not asked PAL to lay off workers. She said the
companies must first reach agreement on Cathay Pacific's entry into
PAL before such operational details can be discussed.
	   ``Our view is that the manpower requirements of PAL are to be
discussed over the long term. Cathay Pacific has no definite plan
as far as staffing is concerned,'' Wang said.
	   She declined to comment on Zamora's and Espiritu's statements
and said Cathay Pacific's negotiations with PAL ``will still carry
on.''
	   PAL closed for nearly two weeks on Sept. 23 after failing to
persuade its largest union to accept a management-proposed recovery
plan under which its collective bargaining agreement would be
suspended for 10 years in exchange for a 20 percent share of the
company's stock.
	   The union later decided to accept the plan, allowing PAL to
resume domestic flights on Oct. 7 and international flights later.
As part of the plan, the union agreed to allow an unspecified
number of workers to be retrenched as long as the laid-off workers
get separation benefits agreed by both sides.
	   In June, PAL was embroiled in a crippling three-week pilots'
strike that brought the company close to financial ruin. At the
height of the strike, PAL laid off 5,000 of its 13,000 workers to
minimize its losses.
	   PAL says it is unable to make payments on dlrs 2.1 billion of
debt due to mounting losses worsened by its labor problems and
Asia's currency crisis.	   

	   HONG KONG (AP) _ Cathay Pacific Airways said Wednesday it had
pulled out of talks to buy a stake in ailing Philippine Airlines _
making the uncertain future at PAL even cloudier.
	   Philippine President Joseph Estrada said he would try to coax
the two sides back together, but it was unclear whether Cathay was
out of the picture for good.
	   ``There is now a real risk of PAL going bust, and this time for
real,'' said airline analyst John Hetherington of Paribas Asia
Equity Ltd. ``PAL is back in the unfortunate position of finding a
new suitor.''
	   But another industry expert suggested the talks between Hong
Kong's flag carrier and PAL might still be ``pretty fluid.''
	   ``This game has been going on for quite a while,'' said airline
analyst Peter Tang at Jardine Fleming Securities Ltd.
	   Cathay said it had withdrawn its bid to pour up to U.S. dlrs 100
million into debt-ridden PAL because of ``certain issues which
could not be resolved,'' according to a statement from company
secretary P.A. Moore.
	   Moore would not elaborate on the stumbling blocks. But
Philippine officials said Cathay and PAL had run into difficulties
in two areas: who would manage PAL and how many workers would lose
their jobs.
	   Cathay executives did not immediately return a reporter's
telephone inquiries about whether they would consider fresh talks
with PAL. Cathay shares were little changed in trading Wednesday's
on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange.
	   Estrada appeared unwilling to give up on PAL, which stopped
flying in a labor dispute in September but soon got back into the
air.
	   ``As much as PAL is the flag carrier, we should see to it that
PAL will always fly. If PAL will close down, so many businesses
will be affected,'' Estrada said.
	   Meanwhile, PAL executive vice president Manolo Aquino said the
carrier has been developing contingency plans to return to
financial health without help from other airlines.
	   ``It isn't a cause for concern,'' he told Dow Jones Newswires.
	   PAL will submit a plan to the Philippine Securities and Exchange
Commission by Dec. 7, the carrier's deadline for finding a way to
make good on some U.S. dlrs 2.1 billion in debts that now are going
unpaid, Aquino said.
	   Early Wednesday, Cathay had expressed dissatisfaction over the
talks with PAL, saying it was ``not willing to continue
negotiations with PAL in its current form.''
	   ``We're very sad. We tried very hard to make it work,'' Peter
Foster, Cathay's regional manager for the Philippines and Taiwan,
told The Associated Press. Foster said the negotiations have been
going on for six weeks.
	   PAL earlier accepted a preliminary investment offer from Cathay
Pacific, and the companies announced Nov. 10 that they would draw
up a comprehensive plan to rehabilitate PAL.
	   Estrada's executive secretary, Ronaldo Zamora, earlier said
PAL's chairman and chief stockholder, Lucio Tan, had gone to the
United States to try to resume negotiations with Northwest
Airlines, one of PAL's prospective investors.
	   PAL closed for nearly two weeks on Sept. 23 after failing to
persuade its largest union to accept a management-proposed recovery
plan under which their collective bargaining agreement would be
suspended for 10 years in exchange for a 20 percent share of the
company.
	   The union later decided to accept the plan, allowing PAL to
resume domestic and international flights in early October.
	   PAL says it is unable to pay all its debts due to mounting
losses worsened by its labor problems and Asia's currency crisis. 	   

	   MANILA, Philippines (AP) _ Philippine Airlines said Thursday it
will attempt to rebuild alone after Hong Kong's Cathay Pacific
Airlines pulled out of talks on acquiring a stake in the ailing
Philippine flag carrier.
	   PAL had hoped for an infusion of capital from another airline to
keep it afloat and help it resume payments on dlrs 2.1 billion in
debt.
	   Manolo Aquino, PAL's executive vice president, said the airline
has prepared a ``stand alone'' rehabilitation plan it will submit
next Monday to Manila's Securities and Exchange Commission.
	   ``It does not provide for a foreign-airline partner but if there
is one in the future, that will be an enhancement,'' he said in a
statement.
	   Aquino said the plan includes the retention of 22 aircraft _
down from 54 _ and the restructuring of debt.
	   Cathay Pacific announced Wednesday that it has withdrawn its bid
to pour up to dlrs 100 million into PAL because of ``certain issues
which could not be resolved.''
	   Philippine officials said Cathay Pacific and PAL disagreed over
who would manage PAL and how many of the more than 8,000 employees
would lose their jobs.
	   PAL closed for nearly two weeks on Sept. 23 after failing to
persuade its largest union to accept a management-proposed recovery
plan under which their collective bargaining agreement would be
suspended for 10 years in exchange for a 20 percent share of the
company.
	   The union later decided to accept the plan, allowing PAL to
resume domestic and international flights.
	   Aquino said he welcomed a statement by President Joseph Estrada
earlier Thursday that Cathay Pacific is still willing to negotiate
with PAL.
	   ``Cathay management wrote me a letter that they are still
available for another negotiation,'' Estrada said. ``So let us not
lose hope.''
	   Estrada said he is awaiting the return from abroad of PAL
Chairman Lucio Tan to determine if the talks can resume.
	   During the PAL shutdown, Cathay flew chartered domestic flights
at the request of Estrada.
	   ``We also owe it to Cathay,'' Estrada said. ``When I asked them
to help ... they responded. This in one way or another solved the
problems of so many businesses that were affected. So I think I can
talk it over with them.''
	   PAL says it is unable to make payments on its debts because of
mounting losses worsened by labor problems and Asia's currency
crisis.


   MANILA, Philippines _ Christmas is a sacred holiday in the
Philippines, and nowhere is that more evident than at the
headquarters of Philippine Airlines. Religious statues adorn
executive offices, and signs throughout the building announce a
holiday mass in the main lobby.


   In these dark days, when its frazzled executives are struggling
to keep the airline afloat, a mass seems entirely appropriate: One
cannot help thinking that what the airline needs is divine
intervention.


   With $2.2 billion in debt, plunging revenues, and losses of
close to $1 million a day, Asia's oldest airline, known as PAL, is
in desperate shape. When negotiations for Cathay Pacific Airways to
acquire a stake collapsed earlier this month, several analysts said
the airline's options were running out.


   ``The rescue effort is not just huge, it is astronomical,'' said
Nicholas Ionides, a Singapore-based editor of Air Transport
Intelligence, a news agency that covers the industry. ``The
question is, Do you keep an airline like this alive for pride
reasons? My opinion is that they should just shut it down.''


   But Philippine Airlines is not just another shipwreck of a
company. It is the nation's flag carrier, a state company until
after the ouster of Ferdinand Marcos, when it was spun off to a
group of investors led by Lucio Tan, an ethnic Chinese who traded
on his ties to Marcos to amass one of the greatest fortunes in the
Philippines. The airline is now the crown jewel in Tan's empire.


   Tan is a leading supporter of the new president of the
Philippines, Joseph Estrada, not only contributing to his campaign
but giving him the use of his planes. When a labor dispute prompted
Tan to shut down the 57-year-old airline in September, provoking
tears from nostalgic Filipinos, it was Estrada who brokered an
agreement that got the planes flying again.


   ``For Estrada, it's a mark of political prestige to save the
airline, and Lucio Tan knows it,'' said Alexander Magno, president
of the Foundation for Economic Freedom, a research organization in
Manila.


   In the murky world of Asian business, where friendships often
count more than solvency, Philippine Airlines would seem to be the
classic candidate for a government bailout. The catch is that
Estrada, wanting foreign investors to view the Philippines as
having a level playing field, has ruled out injecting any public
money.


   As the losses pile up, though, Philippine Airlines will be an
acid test for this movie-star-turned-politician, who has been in
office for six months. Estrada, 61, may find it hard not to help a
friend in need, even if it reinforces the image of the Philippines
as a den of crony capitalism.


   ``It's going to be very tough for Estrada,'' said Christian
Monzad, former chairman of the Philippine Election Commission and a
consultant to the Lopez Group, a Filipino conglomerate. ``He is
very loyal to his friends, and he would like to repay his political
debts.''


   Estrada's decision will be watched carefully in other Asian
capitals, which are grappling with similar issues. In Indonesia,
the government has refused to aid companies with ties to its fallen
president, Suharto. But in Malaysia, Prime Minister Mahathir
Mohamad has continued to pump public money into private companies.


   In the spartan offices of Philippine Airlines, senior executives
insist they can go it alone. On Dec. 7, they submitted a
rehabilitation plan to the Philippine Securities and Exchange
Commission that would turn PAL from a sprawling national airline
into a compact carrier focused on profitable routes.


   The airline said it would prune its fleet, which was
aggressively expanded in the years leading up to the Asian economic
crisis, to 22 planes from 57. It would cut its domestic routes to
17 from 36 and its international routes to 13 from 26; among the
routes lost would be those to Los Angeles and San Francisco.


   The loss of routes has eroded some fond traditions here.
Philippine Airlines used to ferry home for the holidays scores of
Filipinos who work abroad _ often at cut-rate fares it can no
longer afford. On a recent afternoon, hundreds of Filipinos from
North America streamed into Manila via Hong Kong on Cathay Pacific.


   ``I think we have a very good chance of rehabilitating this
airline, although we need the support of the major stakeholders,''
said Jaime Bautista, chief financial officer of Philippine
Airlines.


   The trouble is, the finances do not add up. The airline says it
needs $150 million in fresh capital to overhaul its operations and
begin paying off its debt. Tan and other shareholders will come up
with $90 million, and the rest would come from new investors.


   After the collapse of the talks with Cathay Pacific, analysts
said they doubted that Philippine Airlines would find a white
knight. Bautista conceded that the carrier was not talking to any
other airlines, though he has retained Chase Manhattan Bank to
scour the world for potential partners.


   In the meantime, Bautista said, he saw nothing wrong with the
government throwing the airline a few favors.


   ``A national flag carrier is very important to a country,'' said
Bautista, an amiable man whose punishing work schedule has made him
look a good deal older than his 41 years. ``Governments have always
been there to help.''


   Tan declined to be interviewed. But Bautista said the airline
deserved help because his boss had been treated unfairly by the
government. In truth, Tan's experience is more a case of ending up
on the wrong side of history. Under the Marcos regime, he made a
fortune in the cigarette and beer businesses _ in no small part
through government tax breaks.


   But after Marcos was ousted in 1986, Tan got a chillier
reception from his successors, Corazon Aquino and Fidel Ramos. The
now 64-year-old tycoon was hit with a $1 billion tax-evasion
lawsuit that was finally dismissed by the Supreme Court in 1996.
And he no longer enjoyed preferential treatment.


   None of this stopped Tan from adding to his empire. He first
invested in Philippine Airlines in 1992 and won control in 1996.
But Ramos, who was intent on privatizing the economy, opened the
industry to competition, licensing rivals like Air Philippines,
Cebu Pacific and Grand Air.


   Bautista said the new airlines competed with Philippine Airlines
on profitable routes, like flights to the resort island of Cebu.
But the government required the airline to continue serving
money-losing ``missionary routes'' _ outposts in this vast
archipelago where the planes often fly empty.


   Bautista said the government also allowed foreign carriers to
increase flights to Manila, enabling them to undercut PAL's fares.
Last week the airline asked the Estrada administration to cut back
the flights open to foreign carriers to pre-Ramos levels.


   Edgardo Espiritu, the finance secretary, said the government
would probably grant the request to reverse the ``unhealthy
actions'' of the previous administration.


   Magno of the Foundation for Economic Freedom said these
protections ``would restore PAL to monopoly status.''


   The government is not stopping there. Espiritu has asked several
government-affiliated banks to make bridge loans to Philippine
Airlines. The president of the Philippine National Bank, which is
already owed $81 million by the airline, has resisted the idea. But
the government is the bank's largest shareholder, with a 45 percent
stake, so he may have little choice.


   (STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   nn


   Still, it is not clear that cash alone will solve the problem.
Analysts said Philippine Airlines was being choked by a bloated
payroll. The airline has trimmed its ranks from 12,986 employees to
8,589 since May. But industry experts said it would have to cut
that to 2,000 to compete with more efficient carriers like Cathay
Pacific or Singapore Airlines.


   ``When you've got too many employees sitting around, they get
into other problems _ they go on strike, they organize unions,''
said Jim Eckes, an aviation consultant at Indoswiss Ltd. in Hong
Kong.


   Indeed, a strike by employees precipitated the airline's
near-death experience in September, when Tan shut down the carrier
after its unions refused to accept a drastic cost-cutting plan.
After two weeks of frantic mediation by Estrada, the unions voted
to give up a collective-bargaining agreement in return for a 20
percent stake in the airline and three board seats.


   The agreement gave Tan some breathing room to cut the payroll.
But Eckes said it would be politically untenable to trim enough
workers to make it genuinely competitive. And hacking away at costs
does not erase the carrier's debt load, which, at $2.2 billion, is
larger than its estimated break-up value of $1.6 billion.


   The airline's creditors _ which include local and foreign banks,
plus export-import banks in the United States and Europe _ must
approve the rescue plan. But short of a nasty battle over the
airline's planes, they do not have a better option.


   Two questions now hang over Philippine Airlines. The first is
whether it is really worth saving. Some analysts contend that other
carriers already serve the most critical domestic and international
routes, and that a new airline _ without PAL's baggage _ could soon
claim the mantle of flag carrier.


   ``If you are nonemotional about it, there is no loss,'' said
David Sherman, a consultant who specializes in transportation at
A.T. Kearney in Hong Kong. ``If you are emotional about it, this is
a tragedy.''


   The second question is: Can Philippine Airlines be saved with
Tan? In the negotiations with Cathay Pacific, he refused to
relinquish control, which ultimately doomed the talks. Bautista
said Tan was willing to hand over day-to-day operations but
insisted on retaining control of the board.


   Industry experts said no investor would put up money to revive
the airline unless it gained control. Perhaps the one person who
could ease Tan out of the cockpit is Estrada. But in an interview
last month, Estrada seemed more intent on praising Tan than on
prodding him.


   ``We have to admire Lucio Tan,'' he said, ``because in spite of
losing big money, I was able to prevail upon him to continue losing
money.''


   And how was the president able to do that?


   ``He has attained his goal as a billionaire,'' Estrada replied
solemnly. ``Maybe before he leaves the world, he wants to do
something for his country.''

