
	   BEIJING (AP) _ China's central government ordered the arrest of
a prominent democracy campaigner and may use his contacts with
exiled Chinese dissidents to charge him with harming national
security, a colleague said Wednesday.
	   Two Beijing police officers spent 30 minutes telling Zha Jianguo
to stop trying to set up a political opposition party. Underscoring
the warning, they said his colleague, Xu Wenli, won't be released
soon and may be charged for having links to ``reactionary groups,''
Zha said.
	   Xu and another influential dissident, Qin Yongmin, were arrested
Monday night in police raids in two cities that delivered the
sternest blow so far to a five-month campaign to establish the
China Democracy Party and challenge the ruling Communist Party's
monopoly on power.
	   Qin was arrested for plotting to overthrow the government, a
crime that could land him in jail for life. A third Democracy Party
advocate, Wang Youcai, already in custody for a month, was also
formally arrested Monday although his family has not been informed
of the charges.
	   Zha, who helped Xu organize would-be party members in Beijing
and the nearby port of Tianjin, said police officers told him Xu's
arrest was ordered by the central government, not Beijing police.
	   He took the police reference to ``reactionary groups'' to mean
exiled dissidents in the United States. Under China's vague State
Security Law, such links may also be punishable by up to life in
prison.
	   Zha pledged to work with dissidents in China and exiles in the
United States to campaign ``to save Xu Wenli.''
	   On Wednesday, 190 dissidents from around the country demanded in
an open letter that the government release Xu, Qin and Wang Youcai,
saying the arrests run counter to U.N. human rights treaties China
has signed over the past 14 months.
	   The authorities ``are deceiving and cheating international
public opinion while on the other hand they are suppressing and
persecuting domestic political dissidents,'' said the letter faxed
to foreign news agencies.
	   In Washington, White House spokesman Joe Lockhart said the
United States deplored the detention and arrests of Xu and Qin.
	   ``We believe the peaceful political activities of this kind and
other forms of peaceful expression that they've been involved in
are fundamental human rights that should be protected by all
governments,'' Lockart said. ``We call on the Chinese government to
assure the protection in these cases of Mr. Xu and Mr. Qin.''
	   State Department spokesman James P. Rubin said U.S. officials
conveyed their concerns to the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and urged that Xu be released immediately.
	   U.S. officials received confirmation Wednesday that Xu is being
detained on suspicion of ``having conducted activities damaging to
China's national security,'' Rubin said.
	   He said he had no information from Chinese authorities about Qin
or Wang.
	   Two other democracy party supporters taken into custody in
central Wuhan city along with Qin _ Chen Zhonghe and Xiao Shichang
_ were released Wednesday morning, said He Xintong, Xu Wenli's
wife. She added that police questioned the pair about the party as
well as Qin's human rights monitoring organizations.
	   Qin and Xu are towering figures in China's persecuted dissident
community. Their activism dates to the seminal Democracy Wall
movement of the 1970s. Wang was a student leader in 1989's
influential Tiananmen Square democracy movement. All have spent
time in prison, Xu for 12 years, much of it in solitary
confinement.
	   Xu's wife said she does not know where he is being held and, in
her 20-year experience with the authorities, believes they are
unlikely to tell her.
	   Released in 1993, Xu picked up his campaigning for political
change soon after his parole ended last year. He has tried to use
China's nascent legal system and the international treaties it
signed to push for reform.
	   ``My husband is innocent and there's nothing he can be
criticized for,'' said his wife, He Xintong. ``They're going to
have to expend a lot of effort to make him a criminal.''

	   BEIJING (AP) _ China's government said Thursday that two
prominent dissidents arrested this week are suspected of
endangering national security _ the clearest sign yet Chinese
leaders plan to quash a would-be opposition party.
	   Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhu Bangzao refused to specify what
laws were broken or how Xu Wenli and Qin Yongmin endangered the
state.
	   A third leading advocate of the China Democracy Party who has
been in custody for a month, Wang Youcai, was accused of ``inciting
the overthrow of the government,'' the Hong Kong-based Information
Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China reported.
	   All three men could face up to life in prison if convicted of
the harshest measures under China's vague state security law. The
ruling Communist Party has resorted to the law to silence dissent
since it went into effect last year.
	   The arrests of Xu and Qin at their homes Monday night and the
accusations against them and Wang were the sharpest action Chinese
leaders have taken since dissidents began pushing to set up and
legally register the China Democracy Party in June.
	   Xu and Qin were ``suspected of involvement in activities
endangering state security'' and their ``behavior breached relevant
provisions of the criminal laws of the People's Republic of
China,'' Zhu said at a twice-weekly briefing.
	   Police in Hangzhou city notified Wang's wife Wednesday that
charges have already been submitted to prosecutors, bringing him a
step closer to trial, the Information Center said.
	   Xu and Qin are influential figures in the dissident community,
having started their campaign for change 20 years ago in the
seminal Democracy Wall movement. Wang was a student leader in the
1989 Tiananmen Square democracy demonstrations. Both have served
time in prison. Xu spent 12 years in jail, much of it in solitary
confinement.
	   Since dissidents began organizing and trying to legally register
the China Democracy Party, police have harassed and briefly
detained more than two dozen members, but until now the government
had not leveled such politically charged allegations.
	   The Communist Party has never allowed another political party to
form since it took power in 1949.
	   In Washington on Wednesday, White House spokesman Joe Lockhart
said the United States deplored the arrests and said the
dissidents' peaceful political activities were fundamental human
rights that all governments should protect.
	   U.S. officials conveyed their concerns to the Chinese Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and urged that Xu and Qin be released
immediately.
	   Zhu criticized the United States for condemning the arrests,
saying that ``no country, including the United States, should
interfere in China's internal affairs.''
	   China in October signed a key U.N. treaty on civil and political
rights that guarantees freedom of expression and freedom of
association. It was the 17th international human rights treaty
China has signed.
	   Zhu told reporters there was ``absolutely no contradiction at
all'' between China's support for these treaties and its arrests of
the two dissidents.

	   BEIJING (AP) _ With attorneys locked up, harassed or plain
scared, two prominent dissidents will defend themselves against
charges of subversion Thursday in China's highest-profile dissident
trials in two years.
	   Qin Yongmin's and Wang Youcai's families were running out of
options Wednesday to help the pair, leading organizers of a budding
opposition political party. Qin's family pleaded for a postponement
at Wuhan's Intermediate People's Court, but court officials denied
the request.
	   Police have detained one lawyer and threatened another, and
subtler pressures have been used on others, family members said.
Given the interference, Wang Youcai's wife assumes he will be
convicted.
	   ``Whether he has a lawyer or not, whatever he says, the
government has already decided,'' Hu Jiangxia said.
	   Qin and Wang will be tried separately, in cities 500 kilometers
(300 miles) apart and in proceedings attended only by family and a
few observers selected by the courts.
	   Qin, 44, and Wang, 31, are accused of inciting the subversion of
state power, apparently for helping to organize the China Democracy
Party. They face from 10 years to life imprisonment if convicted
under the harshest aspects of the law.
	   By moving against Qin, Wang and the China Democracy Party, the
ruling Communist Party appears to be signaling its determination to
crush challenges to its monopoly on power. Authorities have
detained or questioned more than 30 people associated with the
party in a 17-day-old crackdown.
	   Qin, a democracy campaigner for 20 years, and Wang, a student
leader of the 1989 Tiananmen Square democracy movement, are among
the most active and influential members of China's dissident
community. A third prominent member of the dissident community, Xu
Wenli, was also arrested in the crackdown, but not yet charged.
	   To prevent displays of solidarity outside Wang's trial, police
have detained at least ten dissidents in the eastern city of
Hangzhou, a Hong Kong-based rights group reported. The Information
Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China said many
more are missing and believed to be in custody.
	   To prosecute Wang, authorities violated the minimal rights
guaranteed suspects under Chinese law and ignored court orders, his
wife said.
	   ``Even the judge asked me to hire a lawyer, but while I was
doing this, some people were doing things to stop me,'' Hu Jiangxia
said.
	   During one meeting with a potential defense attorney, a police
official stormed in and said, ```Don't do anything for them. Don't
take this case. Whoever takes the case, you can't win,''' Hu
recounted.
	   Four law firms refused to take Qin's case, his brother Qin
Xiaoguang said. The Information Center said one lawyer who
initially agreed to represent Qin on Monday went missing for four
hours and then called Qin's family to withdraw.
	   Dispirited by the harsh treatment, Qin's family argued over
whether to attend the trial. Qin Xiaoguang said he and his father
have decided to stay away to protest the unfairness, but another
brother will go.
	   Three dissidents from northeastern China sent an open letter to
China's legislature and the Supreme People's Court appealing for
fair trials, the Information Center said. It added that authorities
violated China's own laws by not ensuring Wang and Qin have
adequate representation.
	   The letter was the latest in a string of petitions demonstrating
the appeal of both Wang and Qin and the idea of the China Democracy
Party.
	   Since Wang publicly announced in June that he and others in
Hangzhou were setting up the party, dissidents in at least 14
provinces and cities have set up party branches. Authorities have
refused their applications to register the party as required by
law.
	   Wang and Qin are the most well-known dissidents China has put on
trial since Tiananmen Square student leader Wang Dan in 1996. He
was convicted of subversion and served less than two of an 11-year
sentence. In return for his release, he agreed to go into exile. 	   

	   BEIJING (AP) _ China released a respected, but ailing labor
rights campaigner from a prison work camp Sunday and immediately
sent him into exile in the United States.
	   Releasing Liu Nianchun appeared to be an attempt by the
government to blunt international criticism over Monday's upcoming
trial of prominent dissident Xu Wenli.
	   Xu is the third leading member of a would-be opposition
political party put on trial for subversion in a three-week
crackdown that has seen 30 dissidents arrested or interrogated.
	   Although pleased that Liu Nianchun was free, human rights groups
decried the Chinese government's timing as manipulative.
	   ``We don't want to give any credit to the Chinese government for
this cynical game it is playing,'' said Xiao Qiang, director of New
York-based Human Rights in China.
	   After 3 1/2 years in prison, Liu was taken from the Tuanhe labor
camp on the outskirts of Beijing, driven to the capital's airport
and put on a Canadian Air flight, ultimately bound for New York,
his mother and brother said.
	   Accompanying Liu into exile was his wife, Chu Hailan, and their
11-year-old daughter, the family said.
	   Liu Nianchun's release follows the same pattern China used in
freeing its two most famous dissidents, Wei Jingsheng in Nov. 1997
and Wang Dan in April. Authorities released Liu on medical parole,
exactly five months before the end of his prison term, provided he
go into exile, Liu Qing said.
	   Liu Nianchun, 50, has been in ill-health for at least two years.
In an exam authorities finally agreed to provide last month,
doctors discovered Liu had tumors in his mouth, stomach and bowels,
Liu Qing said.
	   Like Wang and Wei, the United States and other Western
governments have lobbied China to release Liu. Chinese leaders have
been forcing well-known dissidents into exile throughout the 1990s,
finding that once abroad they lose their influence among dissidents
at home.
	   In the only official comment on the release, the Xinhua News
Agency reported that judicial departments took into account Liu's
health and behavior in the labor camp in approving his parole for
medical treatment.
	   ``I am very happy for Liu Nianchun, but at the same time sending
people directly from prison into exile is a type of human rights
violation and persecution,'' Liu Qing said in a telephone interview
from his home in New York's Brooklyn borough.
	   Liu Nianchun was one of the most respected figures in the
fractured, persecuted dissident community. His more than 3 1/2
years in prisons and labor camps was a sad illustration of the way
China's Communist Party rulers punish people they deem a threat.
	   Liu was imprisoned three times in the past 17 years. His last
arrest came after he signed a petition calling for labor rights in
May 1995. Liu was never put on trial. Fourteen months passed before
his wife, Chu Hailan, first learned of his fate and whereabouts: a
three-year spell in a labor camp in the frigid, remote northeast.
	   His term was the maximum police may impose on criminal suspects
without trial. Labor camp officials later extended Liu's sentence
by a year for trying to escape, a charge Chu claimed was
fabricated.
	   Inside the labor camp, Liu once started a hunger strike to
protest his treatment. He was beaten with cattle prods and confined
to a room of 2 square meters (2 square yards) where he could only
sit or stand.
	   His wife fearlessly endured police harassment, beatings and
detentions in campaigning for his release. Chu was dragged away and
hit by security forces when she tried to hand a letter to U.N.
human rights chief Mary Robinson outside a Beijing hotel in
September.	   


   BEIJING _ In response to criticism from home and abroad, Chinese
officials broke their silence Wednesday to defend their arrest this
week of a prominent dissident who was trying to form an opposition
political party.


   ``Xu Wenli is suspected of involvement in activities damaging to
national security and has violated relevant criminal codes of the
People's Republic of China,'' said a statement from the Foreign
Ministry, which on Tuesday declined to comment on the arrest.


   The sudden arrest on Monday night of Xu, as well as several
other activists involved with him in trying to form the China
Democratic Party, set off strong protests from human rights groups,
other Chinese dissidents and Washington.


   ``We view his detention for peacefully exercising fundamental
freedoms guaranteed by international human rights instruments as a
serious step in the wrong direction,'' State Department spokesman
James P. Rubin said in Washington on Tuesday. &UR;  &LR;  U.S. officials in
Beijing urged the government to release Xu and asked for
clarification as to the exact nature of his crime.


   China signed the International Covenant of Civil and Political
Rights with great fanfare in October, and Xu's arrest is seen by
human rights groups as a test of the nation's commitment to its
tenets.


   Dissidents in and out of China rose to Xu's defense, with more
than a dozen activists around the country announcing that they
would begin fasts in support of Xu and another leader of the China
Democratic Party, Qin Yongmin, who was arrested in his home in
Wuhan on Monday.


   Almost 200 dissidents signed a letter to the Chinese government
protesting the detentions, said the Information Center for Human
Rights and Democratic Movement in Hong Kong.


   Three other Democratic Party organizers were also detained on
Monday, although two of them were released early Wednesday.


   But the two more prominent dissidents, Xu and Qin, are likely to
face a much longer haul since both have been charged with
``criminal acts.''


   Xu's wife, He Xintong, said Wednesday night that she had still
not been informed of the specific charge against her husband,
although she surmised from the aggressive behavior of the arresting
officers that the sentence ``could be long.''


   Qin's family was told that he was charged with ``plotting to
subvert the government,'' a crime that for serious offenses
commands sentences of three years to life.


   (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


   In the Chinese criminal code, this charge comes under a grab-bag
section called ``threatening state security,'' which makes almost
any political activity that questions or hampers the authority of
the Communist Party illegal, from ``violent or nonviolent
activities aimed at overthrowing the government authorities,'' to
``activities designed to change the basic nature of the state.''


   Xu's and Qin's trouble almost certainly stems from their efforts
to gain recognition for the China Democratic Party, a loose network
of pro-democracy activists in more than a dozen cities around China
that was formed this year.


   In the last six months they have become increasingly aggressive
and defiant in their attempts to register the party with the
government, submitting repeated applications even after local
authorities had declared the concept of an opposition party
illegal. They say the Chinese Constitution does not specifically
forbid the formation of new political parties, although there have
been no new parties since the founding of the People's Republic in
1949.


   In fact, the by-laws of the China Democratic Party are fairly
tame; they carefully acknowledge the central role of the Communist
Party, but also support free speech and free elections for public
officials.


   ``My husband thought the time was right to begin working to form
a new party, since China recently signed the covenant on human
rights,'' Ms. He said. In September, a few Democratic Party members
got some slightly encouraging signals from local governments, which
initially accepted their applications to form a social organization
to develop a party. But in recent weeks, as organizers like Xu
became more insistent and defiant, harassment by the police
increased.


   ``All this past week we felt something was going to happen,''
Ms. He said. ``It seemed that anyone who came to visit us was later
detained for a while. And there have been a lot more cars from the
Public Security Bureau parked outside than is usual.''



   BEIJING _ One leader of a suppressed new political party will be
tried on Dec. 17 on a charge of colluding with foreign enemies of
China ``to incite the subversion of state power,'' according to
court documents given to his wife on Monday.


   The decision to try the leader, Wang Youcai, a founder of the
China Democracy Party, with unusual speed suggests how serious the
Communist authorities are in their campaign to destroy the
fledgling party and silence dissidents who had begun to speak out
over the last year.


   The charges that Wang faces, in a trial that will almost
certainly be secret and quick, could bring a sentence of five years
or more. Wang, 32, has been imprisoned in his home city, Hangzhou
in eastern China, for a month, but was not formally arrested until
Nov. 30. On that day two prominent dissidents, both promoters of
the new party, were detained.


   One, Qin Yongmin, 45, of the central city of Wuhan, and the
other, Xu Wenli, 55, of Beijing, are being held on suspicion of
subversive activities. Detailed charges have not been filed.


   Wang was a student leader in the pro-democracy demonstrations in
Tiananmen Square in 1989. After the army had crushed the movement,
Wang was arrested and served two years in prison.


   Qin and Xu became known as democracy advocates in the late
1970s. Qin was imprisoned for eight years. In 1993 he was put in a
labor camp for two years. Xu spent 12 years in prison.


   When President Clinton visited in the spring, Wang announced the
formation of the Democracy Party. He and other dissidents hoped
that China's new friendship with the United States and its decision
to sign a global covenant on political and civil rights would give
them room to promote political alternatives.


   After Clinton returned home Wang was detained, warned and
released, only to be re-arrested as authorities began what now
appears to be a major crackdown on dissent. Monday, Wang's wife, Hu
Jiangxia, was handed the bill of prosecution, according to the
Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in Hong
Kong.


   Wang is charged with helping draft a party manifesto that
states, in part, ``Only by establishing an opposition party can we
be rid of this despotism.'' That is cited as grounds for the
subversion charge, the information center said.


   In addition to detailing Wang's organizing activities, the
prosecutors charge that he colluded with enemies of the state
abroad, making his crime far more serious under Chinese law.


   He used e-mail to send 18 copies of the party's founding
documents abroad, met with a member of a subversive foreign
organization and received money from foreign sources to buy a
computer, the indictment reportedly says.



   NEW YORK _ A Chinese dissident fleeing a new round of arrests of
democracy activists in Shanghai arrived here Wednesday and
announced that he and other opponents of the Chinese government
plan a demonstration Thursday at the United Nations to protest the
crackdown.


   The dissident, Yao Zhenxian, who was released in April from a
Chinese labor camp, is a leader of the China Democracy Party, which
was formed in June during President Clinton's visit to China.


   Speaking through an interpreter at Kennedy International
Airport, Yao, 44, said little about why he had left Shanghai,
except that he and his younger brother, Yao Zhenxiang, 38, had been
sent to a labor camp in 1996 on a ``trumped-up charge'' of
publishing pornography.


   The younger Yao, who is also a prominent figure in the China
Democracy Party, is scheduled for release in April.


   Last week the Chinese government arrested 10 members and
sympathizers of the China Democracy Party, one of whom, Wang
Youcai, is to go on trial Dec. 17.


   ``The Chinese government feels it expanded too quickly,'' Yao
said at the airport, referring to his party. Washington gave Yao a
special visa, which expires in February.


   Dr. Wang Bingzhang, 50, an adviser to the overseas committee of
the party, said later that Yao had left China for personal and
political reasons.


   ``They were scared all the time,'' he said, referring to Yao's
wife, Yu Yingzhang, and daughter, Yao Yiting, 14, who accompanied
him.


   ``The family had a terrible life, especially the daughter.
Secret agents followed them all the time.''


   The family trading business, which was 12 years old, was
shuttered by the government in 1996, said Wang, a former surgeon in
Beijing, ``so they had no way of living.''


   In addition, after Yao made organizational trips to several
provinces, democracy activists urged him to go abroad, Wang said.


   ``They wanted him to tell the truth about what is really
happening in China and to call on the whole world to pay
attention,'' Wang said.


   Beatrice Laroche, liaison at the United Nations for Human Rights
in China, a New York-based group, said the China Democracy Party
was a growing presence in some of China's most populous provinces,
including Sichuan.


   ``But their most vocal leaders have all recently been
detained,'' she added.


   Ms. Laroche said the Yao brothers, especially the younger man,
won prominence by helping to finance predecessors of the China
Democracy Party with money from the family business before it was
closed by the government.



   BEIJING &UR;  &LR; _ Protesting the lack of a defense lawyer, the father
of a prominent dissident is to seek a delay in his son's subversion
trial, scheduled to start on Thursday in the central city of Wuhan.


   The defendant is Qin Yongmin, 45, a democracy advocate who has
spent 10 years in prison and labor camps and has recently promoted
an alternative, non-Communist political party.


   In a telephone interview Wednesday evening, his father, Qin
Qinguo, 76, said that before the trial begins, he plans to hand the
court a written plea for postponement. If the plea is ignored, he
said he will walk out.


   ``I wouldn't be able to stand it,'' the father, a retired
steelworker, said, citing his frail health and high blood pressure.


   Under China's code of criminal procedure, a defendant has the
right to a defense lawyer. But in this case, the elder Qin said,
some lawyers he approached declined to take the case, while others
were warned by security officials not to get involved.


   The father said he did not agree with his son's political
tactics but now he felt he had no choice but to protest his
treatment.


   Qin Yongmin was arrested on Nov. 30, only hours after his mother
died of a stroke.


   ``He wasn't even allowed to attend the funeral,'' Qin Qinguo
said. ``And now he's not allowed to find a lawyer.''


   On Thursday morning, a few hundred miles to the east in the city
of Hangzhou, Wang Youcai, 33, is to go on trial on similar charges
of inciting subversion. He, too, has no defense lawyer.


   Wang was a leader of student demonstrations in Tiananmen Square
in 1989 and served two years in prison after they were put down by
military force.


   As the founder of the suppressed new political party, the China
Democracy Party, he publicly announced its charter in June during
President Clinton's visit to China.


   Scores of people around the country began to champion the new
party, hopeful that closer ties between China and the United
States, and China's signing of the international covenant on
political and civil rights, would mean a looser political climate.


   But the party was soon declared illegal and many adherents were
detained, at least temporarily. Wang now faces charges that could
land him in prison for five years or more.


   A third veteran dissident and promoter of the new party, Xu
Wenli, has been detained for weeks in Beijing and is expected to
face similar subversion charges.


   In the last two days, at least 10 Democracy Party members or
supporters in the Hangzhou area have been detained by the police
and others have had their phone lines cut, reported the Information
Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China, based in
Hong Kong.



   BEIJING _ The separate trials of two prominent democracy
advocates for inciting subversion of the state opened Thursday
morning, with the families of both defendants protesting their
inability to hire defense lawyers.


   The trial in the eastern city of Hangzhou of Wang Youcai, 32,
founder of the China Democracy Party, which is now suppressed, was
in session for just two hours and 10 minutes. It appears to be
finished, although the court did not announce a decision or say
when it would.


   ``I don't know what happens from here,'' said Wang's wife, Hu
Jiangxia, who was one of three relatives allowed to attend the
trial. ``I don't hold much hope,'' she added in a telephone
interview.


   Wang, who spent two years in prison after the 1989 student
demonstrations in Tiananmen Square, was accused of organizing a
political party that sought to overturn Communist Party rule and of
colluding with foreign enemies of the state. He could face five
years or more in prison.


   Since all the lawyers his family approached were intimidated by
security agents, Ms. Hu said, Wang tried to mount his own defense
Thursday morning after prosecutors laid out their case. But the
judge frequently interrupted him and cut him off after half an
hour, saying he was not responding to the specific facts of the
case, she added.


   Wang argued that his activities were legal under China's
constitution and under an international covenant on political
rights that China has signed, Ms. Hu said.


   In the central city of Wuhan, the trial on similar charges of
Qin Yongmin, 45, a veteran dissident, also continued for something
over two hours. It will apparently be continued, said Qin's father,
Qin Qingguo, since the session ended after the prosecution
presented its charges.


   In that case, too, prospective lawyers had been intimidated or
detained, family members said. The elderly father's request to the
court Thursday morning for a postponement was ignored, so he and
one of the defendant's brothers stayed outside the court building
in protest, leaving another brother inside.


   ``We didn't feel there was any reason to observe the trial
because if Qin Yongmin did not have a defense attorney, then as far
as we were concerned the proceedings were meaningless,'' the father
said by telephone.


   The U.S. Embassy asked to observe the trials. When an embassy
official arrived at the court in Hangzhou Thursday morning, he was
told that there were no seats available and instead waited outside,
greeting Ms. Hu when she emerged, shaken, from the brief trial.



   BEIJING _ In a pointed speech delivered to Communist Party
members in the Great Hall of the People, President Jiang Zemin made
clear Friday that China's economic reforms were not a prelude to
Western-style multiparty democracy and that those who challenged
the party's supremacy would be quashed.


   Officially, the speech was intended to commemorate the 20th
anniversary of the Communist Party meeting that marked the
beginning of the reforms. But it also provided a vigorous, if
indirect, defense of the government's recent decision to try three
of the country's most prominent democracy activists on criminal
charges for their efforts to organize an opposition political
party.


   The trials of Wang Youcai and Qin Youming opened on Thursday.
They are accused of inciting subversion of the state, charges that
carry a minimum prison sentence of five years on conviction,
although neither trial has come to a verdict.


   And Friday the family of China's most senior dissident, Xu
Wenli, another organizer of the opposition party, was told that he
would stand trial on Monday, facing an even more serious charge of
subverting state power, which could bring a sentence of life
imprisonment.


   Xu has been detained since Nov. 30, after the police raided his
house and confiscated documents about the new opposition group, the
China Democratic Party.


   While vowing to move ahead with economic reforms, Jiang's speech
was more conservative politically than others he has made this
year. Again and again he invoked Communist Party dogma, using
phrases rarely uttered in the last year, like the ``four cardinal
principles.'' Those state that the leadership of the Communist
Party, adherence to the socialist path and the upholding of Mao
Zedong Thought and of Marxism-Leninism must serve as the foundation
for the country.


   During President Clinton's state visit in the summer, the world
saw President Jiang, agile international political leader, in
action. Friday he was once again General Secretary Jiang, Communist
Party stalwart.


   China's current political system ``must not be shaken, weakened
or discarded at any time,'' Jiang said, adding, ``The Western mode
of political systems must never be copied.''


   Later he said, ``We must be vigilant against infiltration,
subversive activities and separatist activities of international
and domestic hostile forces.'' China must ``fight against factors
disrupting social stability and nip them in the bud,'' he said.


   Jiang's remarks on these topics echoed points made two weeks ago
by Li Peng, the former prime minister who now heads the National
People's Congress, in a rare interview with the German business
newspaper Handelsblatt.


   Li is usually associated with the more conservative faction of
the party. But Friday, as China is facing harsh criticism from
human rights groups and Western governments over its treatment of
the China Democratic Party's leaders, the same admonitions came
directly from Jiang.


   Jiang also said China should not rely too heavily on foreign
countries to boost its economic development, and he acknowledged
that the party had made some ``mistakes'' that had left citizens
dissatisfied. Presumably that was a reference to the millions of
layoffs caused by a shift toward a market economy, and to the
resulting demonstrations that have become commonplace in smaller
Chinese cities.


   But it was, at heart, a back-to-basics talk, a reminder that
even though many of China's citizens wear tailored suits and tote
cellular phones, and even though its billboard-lined thoroughfares
resemble streets in the West, the country remains a one-party
dictatorship.


   Earlier this year, the founding members of the China Democratic
Party, a small, loose network of activists from all over the
country, hoped that there might be room for political opposition.


   Heartened by the relatively open discourse that surrounded the
Clinton visit and later by China's decision to sign the
International Convention on Civil and Political Rights, the
dissidents have repeatedly tried to register their fledgling party
as a government-recognized social organization.


   In the last two months, the official response has moved quickly
from neglect, to polite rebuff, to detention, to this week's
trials.


   It is unclear what will happen to the three men being tried or
the many other Democratic Party members who have been detained as
they have sought to protest the criminal proceedings.


   At the trials of Wang in Hang-zhou and Qin in Wuhan, neither man
was represented by a lawyer, although allowed by Chinese law,
because prospective lawyers were intimidated or detained by local
officials, their families said.


   In a two-and-a-half-hour court session Friday, Wang defended
himself. No defense has yet been presented for Qin.


   Xu, who will go on trial on Monday in Beijing, has been given a
court-appointed lawyer, his wife said. Xu has already spent more
than 10 years in prison. His indictment accuses him of organizing
the China Democratic Party, accepting money from abroad, calling
for independent trade unions and making subversive statements in
interviews with foreign news organizations.


   &QL;

